The Project Gutenberg eBook of The siege of Vicksburg, by Seth James
Wells

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The siege of Vicksburg
       From the diary of Seth J. Wells

Author: Seth James Wells

Contributors: May Wells Bliss
              Sarah Ewell Krolik

Release Date: October 13, 2022 [eBook #69151]

Language: English

Produced by: David E. Brown and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
             at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SIEGE OF VICKSBURG ***



[Illustration]




  The Siege of
  VICKSBURG

  FROM
  THE DIARY OF SETH J. WELLS

  INCLUDING

  WEEKS OF PREPARATION AND OF
  OCCUPATION AFTER THE
  SURRENDER

  DETROIT, MICHIGAN
  WM. H. ROWE, Publisher.

  1915.




  Copyright 1915
  BY
  MAY WELLS BLISS
  AND
  SARAH EWELL KROLIK

  All Rights Reserved




  In Loving Memory
  OF
  Seth James Wells
  AND
  Frank Ewell Wells




Foreword


The Diary of Seth J. Wells from June 14th, 1861, to July 9th, 1864,
relates to the every day life of the soldier in camp and field and
records its tramps and hardships cheerfully borne.

The Siege of Vicksburg is taken from the Diary.

He was born on April 26th 1842 in Iowa, Des Moines County, near the
village of Rising Sun and was reared in his Grandfather Ewell’s family
on the “Ewell Farms” in Michigan, Macomb County, near the village of
Utica.

He was wounded in battle and died a few days later in a hospital at
Vicksburg on July 9th 1864. He enlisted on June 12th 1861 and served in
three companies of the United States Army during the Civil War: Company
E, 12th Indiana; Company K, 17th Illinois; Company G, 8th Illinois. The
brothers, Frank and Seth, were together in Company K, 17th Illinois.

                                                                S. E. K.




The Siege of Vicksburg


DUNLAP SPRINGS, NOV. 3, 1862. We have built a snug log house and last
night for the first and probably last time have slept in it; for our
company has orders to move down town and act as city guards. There
are eight or ten regiments here, some of them new ones from Jackson,
Miss. The new regiments, like all new ones, have great confidence in
themselves and think the war is to be settled by them and them only.
There is an undercurrent of jealousy existing between the old and new
troops. The old troops call the new ones “forty dollar men,” “bounty
men,” and “home guards.” Last Friday, Oct. 31, we had general review
from Gen. McPherson who is here commanding the post. There were twenty
regiments, ten thousand men, I should judge, on the field. There is
a great forward movement taking place. All the troops started out on
the Grand Junction road this morning with the exception of the 43rd,
and 17th Ill. The weather is fine, the days are warm and pleasant, but
the nights are very cold and frosty. About once in ten days we have
a northeast rainstorm, followed by cold weather and sleet. We are on
guard every other day, sometimes every third day.

NOV. 7. We got a buggy shed from the citizens, boarded it up tight,
built a furnace in it, and were just putting on the finishing touches,
(battening up the cracks with cotton) when we received marching orders.
Such is the fortune of war.

NOV. 8. We struck our tents and started for Grand Junction about 10
o’clock. The boys are in fine health and spirits. We marched about nine
miles and camped by a clear spring.

NOV. 9. Sunday. We marched about fifteen miles today and arrived at
LaGrange, three miles west of Grand Junction. It is dry and very dusty.
Sometimes the dust was so thick we could not see the ground. That and
the smoke and heat from the burning fences was almost intolerable. We
passed miles and miles of burnt and burning fences, fired by troops in
advance. Large and fine farms and plantations were laid waste. We met
fully forty teams of four and six mules each, loaded with wenches and
young woolly heads, and all their personal effects, and in fact all
they could smuggle from their masters. Ask them where they are going
and they will tell you, “You folks sent’s to Bolivar, don’t know where
wes goin’ from thar.” I blistered my feet badly on the march. We hear
that Hollow Springs is evacuated. We have very stringent orders in
regard to stealing. Everything has to be paid for by the division when
it cannot be traced to the company, regiment or brigade of the persons
committing the theft. I hope they will be enforced.

NOV. 14. All quiet. We had brigade drill this forenoon. Our brigade
consists of the 7th Missouri, 8th, 63rd and 18th Illinois, commanded by
Col. Stevenson of the 7th Missouri. Our regiment is the first of the
fourth brigade, third division, of the right wing of Gen. Grant’s army.
Gen. John A. Logan made a speech to the troops this afternoon.

NOV. 20. Col. Stevenson made a few remarks to us this morning after
drill. He is good natured and jolly, and a fine speaker. He gave us
great praise and said he had the 7th Missouri, 8th and 63rd Illinois,
with the pick of another five or six regiments, among them ours. He
took us and placed us on the right of his brigade in preference to any
other.

NOV. 21. Our brigade was reviewed by Generals McPherson and Logan this
afternoon. Gen. McKean’s brigade was reviewed today.

NOV. 24. There was grand review this afternoon. Generals McPherson,
Grant and Logan were the review officers. The weather is fine but the
nights are very cold.

NOV. 25. On picket one mile southeast of LaGrange, the night was very
cold.

NOV. 27. We received orders to pack up and be ready to move down town
this morning, where we were to be quartered and remain as provost
guard. We marched down about 8 o’clock and secured our quarters.
Sixteen, including Frank and myself, took a room upstairs in an old
grocery with an old stove. During the day we fixed our bunks and got
some benches from a church close by, and by night had things quite
comfortable. LaGrange comes nearer to being like a northern town than
any other I have seen in the South.

NOV. 28. I was on guard in front of the Provost-marshall’s office
today. The troop began to move toward Holly Springs long before day
light. While I was in town five batteries and as many brigades passed.
Gen. Grant passed us a number of times. He is looking a great deal
better than when at Inka.

NOV. 29. The troops have mostly passed out and it is getting quiet once
more.

DEC. 1. While I was looking out of the window this morning at some
recruits for the 48th Indiana, whom should I see but John Metternich of
our old company. (Co. E, 12th Ind.) He was as much surprised as I; the
last time I saw him, his head was bruised and bleeding as the result
of a spree. This morning a band of guerillas came up within about two
miles of this place, captured a number of mules and burned the cotton
they were hauling.

DEC. 2. Tuesday. The 109th Ill. came in tonight.

DEC. 4. I was on guard today. It rained nearly all day, and toward
night we had a real northerner.

DEC. 5. Late in the afternoon it turned cold and began to freeze and
snow.

DEC. 6. Ground is frozen quite solid this morning, for the first time
this winter. There is some excitement among the boys of the 17th in
regard to a report that Gov. Yates has ordered home ten of the old
regiments to recruit and fill up their ranks. If any go, the 17th will
probably be one of them, as the company reports only twenty-two for
duty.

DEC. 7. Sunday. I was detailed for guard this morning and stood before
the provost-marshall’s office.

DEC. 9. On fatigue. Weather fine.

DEC. 10. Weather fine. We had dress parade at 4 o’clock.

DEC. 11. Weather warm. I was on fatigue nearly all day, cutting and
hauling wood for the company. We had dress parade at 4 o’clock. Just
at dusk the news came in that a guerilla band was to attack us before
morning. Fifty men from our regiment and forty-eight from the 126th
(which is here doing picket duty) were detailed to build breastworks of
cotton, four hundred bales of which lay near the depot. Col. Norton and
Major Bates did the engineering. After they had finished we lay on our
arms during the night, but no enemy made its appearance, and about 7
o’clock we were ordered back to camp.

DEC. 12. Quite sore from chopping and rolling cotton. Our Colonel,
Amos Norton, is Commander of the Post, and Rats is provost-marshal,
Col. Smith commanding the regiment. Toward dark a rumor was rapidly
circulated through the camp that we were ordered to Holly Springs,
Miss. No one could tell where it started from, and consequently no one
credited it.

DEC. 13. Marching orders, sure enough. We drew three days’ rations this
morning, with orders to have two cooked and in our haversacks, ready
to march at 5 o’clock the next morning. I have a new pair of boots
which I expect to break in on the march--or they will break me. We were
relieved this morning by the 126th. I have a very severe cold.

DEC. 14. Sunday. Reveille sounded this morning a little after 2
o’clock. We filled our haversacks, got our breakfasts, and by daylight
were ready for the march. We fell into ranks, the regiment was formed,
and then we witnessed an unexpected ceremony which is disgusting
to every true soldier--the drumming out of a fellow soldier for
disobedience and disgraceful conduct. I should prefer death to being
marched between two lines of a regiment by a guard, at a charged
bayonet, with an escort, the band playing the Rogues March, and the
remainder of the regiment standing at charged bayonets; but it was
soon over, the ranks were closed, and the regiment started on the
march. We crossed Wolf Creek, a fine stream one mile from LaGrange. We
passed over a fine country somewhat broken. The army has surely left
its mark here. Miles of fences and scores of houses have been burnt.
From one place we could count seven or eight ruins. The destruction of
property is not countenanced by a good soldier, but every regiment has
its straggling, order breaking reprobates that are a disgrace to the
flag they fight under. We reached Coldwater toward night and camped. I
was on guard. I came across an old cove who helped build dam No. 4, in
Maryland, and knew all the citizens who live there now.

DEC. 15. We struck tents early, packed our effects as snugly as
possible, and as on the preceding morning, shouldered our knaps. It
rained during our entire march to Holly Springs, the flower city of the
South, and on our arrival there the flood gates of heaven opened and
the rain poured down on our defenseless heads in torrents. We stood it
about two hours before the Colonel could secure quarters. Three-fourths
of a mile up the railroad track we found a very large rebel arsenal,
but were wet to the skin long before we reached this shelter. It
continued to rain all day without intermission.

DEC. 16. We packed up twice to change our camp today, but the order was
countermanded each time. The arsenal is a very extensive building and
the rebels turned out one hundred small arms per day. We are preparing
it for an extensive hospital. Quartered here again tonight. I went up
to the depot and while there met old Captain Backman, of Co. C, 12th
Ind. Reg. He is now sutler in the same regiment, which is located but a
few miles below here doing picket duty on the railroad.

DEC. 17. Toward night we received marching orders and started for
Abbyville at dark. We heard that there was great excitement at Jackson,
as an attack from a detachment of Bragg’s men was expected. We marched
about eight miles from town and crossed the Yazoo swamp, where we
camped for the night. The next morning we again packed up and started
for Abbyville.

DEC. 18. We arrived at the Tallahatchie Bottoms about noon. Bissell’s
engineer regiment is encamped here. It has just finished the railroad
bridge over the river and the cars now pass on to Oxford in advance.
There was a clearing with two redoubts which we passed before entering
the woody bottoms of the Tallahatchie. The teams were halted and we
slung our knapsacks and carried them over the marshy bottoms. We had
advanced but a short distance when the formidable earthworks which the
Rebs had erected, loomed up before our eyes. When we once more struck
terra firma we were halted, unslung our knaps, and when the teams
came up, packed them on the wagons. I started on and entered the camp
of the 12th Ind. Volunteers. Found the old members of Co. E. divided
among two companies--F and I, both gotten up at Warsaw. We arrived at
Abbyville in the middle of the forenoon. The country between LaGrange
and Abbyville is rough and hilly.

DEC. 19. Jesse Walker and I went out foraging and succeeded in
capturing a shoat. The nigs were left very destitute and there will be
a great deal of suffering if the government does not feed them. There
is a report that Jackson, Tenn., is threatened by Bragg; that there is
fighting there and our communications are cut off, at any rate troops
are on the move, being taken back by rail as fast as possible. There is
a great battle being fought this morning by Burnside’s men. They have
already fought one whole day. Burnie has crossed the river and holds
Fredericksburg.

DEC. 20. The news came in this morning that Holly Springs was entered
at daylight and captured. The Rebels took over two hundred thousand
dollars and burned the depot with all the stores and the arsenal we
had fitted up for a hospital. After dinner we were set to work building
breastworks of cotton, having captured one thousand bales from the C.
S. A. When we first came here the regiment was scattered along the
railroad, one company in a place extending nearly to Oxford. Companies
G and K were kept here, this being the headquarters of Regiment 1,
Norton commanding the Post. Two companies below were sent up, and
by night we had a complete breast-work of cotton bales, regular old
hickory style.

DEC. 21. The long roll was beaten at 3 o’clock this morning. The
company was formed and we marched down to our cotton fort where we lay
until daylight, when the other companies marched to their camps, and
we back to ours. Last night a division of cavalry passed, going north.
It was composed of the 3rd and 4th Ill., 7th Kansas and 3rd Mich. Just
before night Generals Ross and McArthur came into town with their
respective divisions. They are moving back for some cause. The weather
is fine but the nights are very cold. It is what people call pleasant
fall weather in Michigan. We have had no more snow since the flurry
in September, and the weather never was more favorable for a winter
campaign. The army is well clothed, having as much clothing as the
soldiers wish to pack.

DEC. 22. On guard in Frank’s place, he has gone foraging ten miles
below. More troops passed on their way back.

DEC. 23. Gen. Grant passed through here this morning on the train. The
division of Denver’s, (ex-governor of Kansas, for whom Denver City was
named) passed through here today also. The troops are all coming up
further north. The cars are going north loaded with cotton. I think
this is a cotton expedition.

DEC. 24. On picket guard today. Got my boots half soled. Gen. McPherson
passed through here, and Logan’s division is coming up and passing
through. Our old brigade (Col. Stevenson’s) also passed. A train came
in a little after dark and was loaded with cotton. The country is
stripped of everything and so we are on half rations. All the hogs and
live stock have been killed. The Negroes are suffering and I think they
would welcome their old masters. There are a great many leaving, a
large carload left today. We have poorer fare than at any time since we
enlisted.

DEC. 25. _Christmas._ I came off guard duty this morning. We drew half
rations for four days and part of that was cornmeal. Our coffee is rye
and in small quantities at that. The boys have gone out to see if they
can find a stray hog or beef for Christmas dinner. Oh! if I could be at
home today.

_One o’clock._ We just now received marching orders to be ready
tomorrow morning. Frank, Bill, Buttons and Boggs of our mess, and Ragan
and Doughty of the Peacock mess, fetched in a whole beef, and a few
minutes later Abe, John and Scott brought in a whole hog. If we live on
half rations it will not be of meat, as we have a hog and half a beef.
It is very warm and pleasant today, I lay down and took a nap, but the
flies were so troublesome I could hardly sleep.

DEC. 26. Warm and raining. We were astir early, cooked our breakfasts,
filled our haversacks with meat and what little bread we had, and fell
in about 7 o’clock. It began to rain and we had gone but a mile or two
when we were wet through. We secured two ox teams, one of six oxen, and
one of four, which hauled our knapsacks. The 12th Ind. is still camped
on the Tallahatchie. Saw Lieut. E. Webster and Tom Anderson, they are
living on quarter rations. Capt. Williams, now Colonel of the regiment,
was at Holly Springs at the time it was captured and he was taken for
the third time. We marched to the Yazoo Bottoms and camped on the
opposite side. It rained and we were completely soaked. The ground was
muddy and I looked around, found a stack of corn, dug down to the dry
stalks, husked out a lot and made a bed for myself. We are within seven
miles of Holly Springs.

DEC. 27. Warm and rainy this morning. We struck out tents, fell in
about daylight and marched through to Holly Springs, where we saw the
effects of the late raid.

A long ambulance train, a large hotel and one whole block was burned,
also the whole of the large arsenal building which we had prepared and
were using for a hospital, the large depot and all the supplies that
were in it, two or three engines and a long train of cars. When the
magazines exploded it jarred out nearly all of the window glass in that
part of the town. We camped on the north side in a beautiful grove. As
soon as camp was laid off we killed one of our oxen which had labored
so faithfully in hauling our knapsacks here, and drew one more day’s
rations to finish out our four days. The boys have taken the mills into
their own hands and are shelling and grinding corn, what they should
have done long ago, live off the country. They tell us that we are the
first regiment of the first brigade, sixth division (Gen. Arthur’s) of
Grant’s department. There has been no time to parole the sick.

DEC. 28. Sunday. We lay here all day, all is quiet.

DEC. 29. A foraging party went out this morning. One of our boys killed
five hogs and thirteen chickens, and found two government wagons and
two barrels of molasses that the Rebs had taken out from Holly Springs
and hidden. At 3 o’clock we had orders to move in twenty minutes for
Moscow, a small town ten miles west of LaGrange on the Memphis and
Charleston railroad. We marched to the opposite side of Coldwater and
camped for the night. Our brigade was in advance of the division and
our regiment in advance of the brigade.

DEC. 30. Rained a good deal last night. We were up early. Our regiment
was rear guard to the wagon train today. It cleared off early and was
quite cool, making a fine day for marching. We carried our knapsacks
as on the previous day, and marched about eight miles. Fine country
between Coldwater and Moscow, that is for Mississippi. Most plantations
have fine mansions. There have been but few troops over this road,
consequently cattle and hogs are quite abundant. Our boys drove in
about sixty hogs and most of them are fine, fat ones. When they came
into camp the boys pitched in, each man for himself, and our mess got
half a hog.

DEC. 31. Last night was very cold. It snowed quite hard. The regiment
formed this morning and guns were fired off. We were formed for muster
at 2 o’clock yesterday. Abe left our mess, also Geo. Scott, both were
ill.

JAN. 1, 1863. Thursday. Bright and clear, warm and pleasant. How well
do I remember two short years ago today when we took a sleigh ride
and made a regular family visit at Uncle Tim’s. Since then I have
traveled over four thousand miles, five hundred and eighty of which I
marched with gun on my shoulder; have seen more vice and drunkenness
than I ever supposed existed, yet I hope I am morally no worse than
when surrounded by kind relatives and friends. An orderly call beat
immediately after reveille this morning at which time we received
orders to cook our rations and be ready by half past seven. We cooked
our fresh pork and by the appointed time had it in our haversacks,
and our knapsacks strapped on our backs, ready for the march. We went
eight miles and camped close to a small town called Lafayette, situated
on the Memphis and Charleston R. R. As soon as we had pitched our
tents, Chas. Berry and myself went out one mile from camp and killed a
hog. We are now the first regiment of the first brigade, commanded by
Brigadier-General McArthur, of Gen. Hamilton’s corps, of the left wing
of Gen. Grant’s army. We were put in the rear of the brigade today as a
special guard to keep up the stragglers.

JAN. 2. Struck out tents early this morning and marched to
Colliersville, a distance of seven miles from Lafayette and twenty-four
from Memphis. As soon as we had stacked our arms and broken ranks,
John Cumbersworth and I went out a mile and a half from camp and got
a fine hog. While we were skinning it our orderly-sergeant, Sullivan,
Jesse Walker and Mike Walsh were captured not more than a quarter of
a mile distant, by a band of rebel cavalry. Sullivan turned and ran
and several shots were fired after him, which we heard plainly but we
thought it was the boys shooting hogs. When we got into camp Bob Dew
and Charlie Berry came in with their paroles, they having been caught
by the same company. Five paroled from Co. K in one day. Five such
days’ work will muster Co. K out of service. The 17th Ill. at present
musters about three hundred and fifty men. On guard tonight; storming
fearfully.

JAN. 3. Quite pleasant during the day, but it rained heavily all night.

JAN. 4. We had inspection at 1 o’clock. Col. Norton’s tent burned today.

JAN. 5. Monday. I am on guard at the depot today.

JAN. 8. Orders are very strict. If caught outside of the pickets the
fine is ten dollars. We get up at 4 o’clock in the morning and stack
our arms. I am on parole guard today. We expect to move in a day or two.

JAN. 11. The regiment was formed at 4 this morning. In the afternoon
we received marching orders. Our division has been moving up all day.
Logan’s division is here. The stockade fort that the contrabands are at
work on near the depot is almost completed. At 4 o’clock we had dress
parade. Orders were read, fining the absentees from roll call since the
last of December, one dollar each time.

JAN. 12. We were called up at half past three this morning and were on
the road inside an hour, and by sunrise were four miles on the way.
We arrived at Germantown about 10 o’clock. It is a village. At five
minutes before 12 o’clock we halted for dinner, and started again on
our march at 1 o’clock, our regiment in advance. We reached the edge of
a town at dusk where we learned that we were selected as guard at the
navy yard. As we passed through the town, the little children followed
us and hurrahed for Jeff Davis. We moved to the upper end of town and
encamped on land adjoining the navy yard. Col. Norton bought five
cords of wood for us. He made a speech in which he said Gen. Hamilton
ordered McArthur to send his best disciplined regiment here as guard,
and he wanted us to be strict, orderly, and diligent. He also said the
duty was a kind of secret service (how so I do not understand). The
guerillas crossed over last night, cut around and burned a steamer. We
are very tired this evening, having made the heavy march of twenty-six
miles.

JAN. 13. We moved into the navy yard this morning. Had seven men
detailed for guard. I was one of them. We were put on camp, or chain
guard. I don’t see where the secret service comes in, for my part. I
was down to see the ex-reb gunboat, “Gen. Bragg,” she was injured at
Vicksburg and is being repaired. There are five or six mortar boats
lying close to shore.

JAN. 14. I came off guard this morning. It rained very hard all the
latter part of the night. Another boat load of troops came down last
night, making five or six in all. They are from the Kansas Valley
Division of Fremont’s old forces.

JAN. 15. About six inches of snow fell last night and it has snowed
all day. The citizens say it is the heaviest storm they have seen in a
number of years. By night it was about ten inches deep. The paymaster
paid off all but our company today.

JAN. 16. We were paid off this morning, after which there was a general
settling up of accounts. I drew $41.00; $25.00 advance bounty, one
month’s advance pay, and $3.00 premium for re-enlisting. I expressed
$25.00 home. It is very cold this morning, not more than five or six
degrees above zero. Towards noon the report came that we were to be
relieved. We were almost frozen, having no chance to fire up and keep
warm. These are the dark days of a soldier’s experience.

JAN. 17. I was on guard supernumerary in the daytime and stood beyond
Wolf Creek at night. Towards night the sergeant-major came along with
instructions to be ready at 6:30 o’clock in the morning to go aboard
the transports for down the river.

JAN. 18. We were up early and had our things packed at 8 o’clock, fell
into ranks and marched down to the wharf and on board the “Superior,”
a fine river boat. The 11th Ill., 17th Ill., and part of the 16th
Wisconsin regiments are on our boat. It took all day to load and at
night we went up to the coal yard just above town to coal up. Abe and
I made our bed down on the top of the hurricane deck. About midnight
it began to sleet and rain, and before morning our blankets were
completely soaked. It was about as disagreeable a night as I ever spent.

JAN. 19. Cold, rainy and windy. We lay here all day coaling up, and
suffered with the cold. Most of the boys kept warm by drinking whisky.
Nearly all have their canteens full. We have details patrolling the
town, picking up the stragglers. Still rainy and disagreeable. At 1:30
the boats backed off and started down the river. We stopped a few
minutes at the forts, two or three miles below the town. There are
fifteen boats in the fleet, among the principal ones are the “Nettie
Dean,” “Silver Moon,” “Minnehaha,” “Platte Valley,” “Superior,” “Maria
Denning,” “Sunnyside,” “St. Louis,” “Gate City,” “Mary Forsythe,”
“City of Madison,” “Arago,” and “Belle Reora.” Our regiment lost about
fifty men at Memphis, three from our company. At dark we tied up to the
Arkansas shore. It was dreary and cold but I went on shore on purpose
to put my foot on Arkansas soil. We set our pickets and stayed all
night. Abe Van Auken and I slept under Jim Mitchell’s bunk, the same as
the night before and slept fine.

JAN. 21. The boat shoved off at daylight and started down at 10
o’clock. We arrived at Helena, a small town, where we stopped about
three hours, and then went on down the river. It is thickly timbered
on both sides most of the way. There are a few farm houses scattered
along. At sundown we tied up to the Arkansas shore just forty miles
above Napoleon, at the mouth of the Arkansas river. As soon as we
halted the “Silver Moon” played several tunes on her calliope. I went
back to a little town of Nig quarters just over the levee, about
one-half a mile from the river and tried to get something to eat, but
they had nothing to sell or give. Everything was eaten up and the
levees were all breaking away and they could not repair them as the
able bodied had run away. Most of the Whites that are not in the Rebel
service have left. One of our boats was fired on today. We passed
Napoleon about 9 o’clock. At sundown we tied up at the Mississippi
shore, eighty miles above the mouth of the Yazoo, and opposite the
state of Mississippi.

JAN. 23. We started at sunrise as on the preceding morning. The wind
blew quite strong, making it difficult for some of the smaller boats
to keep up. When we were within a few miles of the Yazoo, the flagship
“Platte Valley” halted and gave us the signal to close up. We closed up
in regular order and about 3 o’clock came in sight of a fleet of eighty
transports and gunboats at the mouth of the Yazoo. We halted about one
mile above them, and twelve miles from Vicksburg by water, or eighty
by the short cut on the Louisiana side. The troops here tell us our
boys are working on the Farragut’s canal and are to have it finished
in a few days. We slept in the boat last night, Abe and I in our old
place. The country for over a hundred miles above here is quite thickly
settled by wealthy planters. On some of the plantations the Negro
quarters form quite a town. The trees on the shore are covered with a
long vine-like growth called Spanish moss. It is light green in color,
and gives an appearance of being dead and covered with icycles.

JAN. 24. Rained all day; slept in the boat last night.

JAN. 25. Sunday. The regiment was formed early this morning and we
moved back out of the levee into camp. The river is rising, it is on a
level with our camp. It is warm and pleasant, a real spring day. There
was heavy firing this evening down the river. I saw the “Chillicothe”
tonight. There were four men detailed to go down to the ditch tomorrow.

JAN. 26. Warm and rainy. More boats went down last night, one war boat
and several transports. We heard heavy firing this morning, supposed to
be the gunboats. The river is still rising.

JAN. 28. Bill Boggs and myself secured a pass this morning early and
started down to the canal. We followed the river bank until we were
about one mile and half from the ditch, when we saw that we were upon
a bayou that ran back up the river about two miles. We had to turn
back, feeling pretty badly sold as it made us four miles extra walk.
Young poplars were so thick that we could not see where we were for a
while. The levee is broken in two places. Our division (6th McArthur)
is repairing the upper one, and the lower division the lower one.
The water is running through here badly. They are planting artillery
behind the levee all along between camp and the ditch. The levee forms
a substantial breast-work. One mile this side of the ditch we came,
for the first time, within full view of Vicksburg. The town lies upon
the west side of a sloping bluff. One large church and the courthouse
and one earthworks could be distinguished quite plainly. The town did
not look more than two or three miles distant, but it is not less than
eight. An officer was looking through a glass, he could see transports
at the wharf, and a crowd collected around someone who was taking
observations. As we passed the mouth of the Yazoo we could look up and
see three or four gunboats and as many rams, while on this side lay the
“Chillicothe” and three rams. As I was going down I was hailed by two
cavalry men who had just passed me. On looking up, whom should I see
but Oll and Dave Hubler, formerly of Co. E, 12th Ind. They belong to
Co. C, 4th Ind. cavalry. They told me that Geo. Hissung is down here.
They are bodyguard to Gen. Smith. Pat Gallegher and Bill Humphrey, our
old first lieutenant and orderly, are here. Nearby is the far famed
ditch. About noon we sat down on its banks and took a good rest. The
boys encamped there say the water has risen one foot today. It is now
five feet deep and has a rapid current. It averages over twenty feet
wide upon the surface. The Mississippi is rising rapidly. I went down
to the lower end of the ditch, it is one mile and one-eighth in length.
There are heavy details at work throwing up a levee on the west side
of it. We have thirty two-pound parrots blockading the river. They
are posted behind the levee here. When we arrived Gen. McClernand was
taking observations. The Rebels are throwing up heavy works below the
mouth of the ditch upon the opposite side. It is about three miles
distant. We could see them moving around, coming up and going away.
We lay there about two hours and watched them. We could see two heavy
earthworks, or forts, and one line of rifle pits. We went from here up
to the head of the ditch. It starts in an eddy and there was a tug,
“The Ivy,” lying in front to keep out the driftwood. It is hard to tell
if the thing will prove advantageous. Large details at work, showing
that the generals still have faith in it. We understand that they
have sent for a dredge. There are encampments all the way between our
division and the ditch. Gen. Steele’s division is below the mouth of
it. We came back to camp a little after dark, tired and hungry, having
traveled during the day about twenty miles, but were amply repaid.
McClernand is a homely man, apparently about forty-five years of age,
with black whiskers and a Roman nose. I saw a fine looking general,
said to be Gen. Steele.

JAN. 29. This is a beautiful day. I am quite stiff and sore from the
effects of my walk. There was a detail from the sixth division this
morning, mounted on mules and sent out in the northwestern direction
upon a scout. Corp. Si. Livingston and Privates Briton and Schultz
represented Co. K, 17th Ill. They went about sixteen miles to a little
town called Richmond, where they found a detachment of the enemy, but
owing to a large bayou, our boys could not get at them, and had to
leave them in possession of the place. We heard heavy cannonading this
morning. The Rebs had undertaken to cross with about five hundred head
of cattle, but slipped up on it, and they fell into our hands.

JAN. 30. I was detailed on fatigue this morning. The detail from our
regiment worked on the big break in the levee. We did a good day’s
work, and slightly checked the current. The Mississippi continues to
rise. Uncle Ben, Scott and Patterson returned from their three days’
scout. They had been up the river after beef and had secured fifty
head. Mail came in last night, Frank received a letter from Rosalie,
dated Jan. 4. Just to think, they have had no snow yet in the north.
Generals U. S. Grant and Ross have arrived.

JAN. 31. The first news that greeted us this morning was marching
orders. After breakfast we drew four days’ rations, two of them cooked,
put them in our haversacks, and were ready to march aboard the boats.
About 2 o’clock the regiment was formed and we marched aboard the
“Crescent City” and the “Ella,” escorted by a gunboat, or Ram No. 2. We
started in the fore part of the night. Abe and I found a place on the
lower deck on the top of a wood pile, and it is well we did, for it
rained nearly all night.

FEB. 1. Sunday. We went forty miles last night. This is a rainy day.
Fortune seems to be against us when we float the Mississippi. Our
rations in the bread line since we left Bolivar have been mostly
hard-tack with cornmeal. We occasionally draw flour. The hard crackers
we draw are better now than they have been before. The boats have moved
very slowly against the current today. We arrived at Providence the
middle of the afternoon, landed above the town, and went ashore. Our
company and company F surrounded the town but caught no one. Capt.
Wheeler and three or four of us entered the Post Office and searched
it. We found a few letters and papers. We broke open the ballot box
which was full of tickets voted for Jeff Davis. Abe and I each got us a
set of chess men. I got a six-inch drafting rule, also some pamphlets
giving the object and description of the K. G. C., or Knights of the
Golden Circle. Providence, before the war, must have been a beautiful
town, but now it is almost deserted. A few women and children were
standing in the doors, nearly scared to death. They scarcely knew what
to expect from the long dreaded Yankees. The Post Office is a large
brick building, in the back part of which was the equipment of the
Sons of Malta. We caught no guerillas. We threw out our pickets and
slept upon the boat, Abe and I upon the hurricane deck, as our wood
pile was burned up. It was quite cool for this country, one might say
cold. We lay in the boat until the middle of the afternoon. A detail
from the brigade went out mule-back this morning on a scout. When we
heard that guerillas were out a few miles in the country, our company
and company G were ordered out. Col. Dietzler said there was no use in
going farther as there were none there, but the boys wanted a little
exercise, so they took us about two miles to a nice plantation, where
we killed a lot of chickens. Gus Schultz and I caught eight, I caught
five and found some eggs. John Cumbersworth, also of our mess, got
a frying pan which we needed very much. One of our boys was thrown
from a mule. It commenced raining just as we started back, and before
we arrived at camp we were completely soaked through. We were called
aboard and dropped off below town where we remained until morning. The
night was very cold and the ground was frozen quite solid. This morning
there was a detail of nearly half the brigade for fatigue. We were put
to work digging away the levees to let the water into Lake Providence,
which is one mile back from the river. There was once a channel between
the river and lake in high water, but it is dammed up. The lake makes
connections with Red River through bayous. Providence is equally
divided into three parts, they are separated by the old channel, which
forms a common for the town. The town is a little higher than the
channel, but lower than the levee. The inhabitants are badly scared
and are moving out. It will all be inundated when we get the levee cut
through. The engineers say there are four feet and six inches of fall
between the surface of the river and the surface of the ground below
the levee. We worked until noon, and then another relief came on. The
regiment moved down to the boats and camped on the other side of the
levee. We got a large barroom stove for our tent. This evening there
was a detail sent across the river to a large plantation for Nigs. One
hundred and forty were caught and sent to Vicksburg. We saw peach trees
in bloom today. We met Gen. McArthur and bodyguard when we were coming
out.

FEB. 11. Boggs, Buttons and I went over the river this morning on an
old flat log. About 10 o’clock Si Livingston and I had permission to
go out and get some chickens. We crossed over on the log, baled out
an old canoe, and took a ride up the river two miles and a half, and
stopped at a beautiful plantation. We could buy nothing. We then struck
back for camp, and stopped on the way at another plantation and got
five chickens. The steamer “Louisiana” came around this morning with
provisions. Two men from company E knocked down an old Negro and
robbed him. It was proven, and Major Peats had them tied up by the
hands, with a card on their backs.

FEB. 12. The two men were tied all day. We played ball.

FEB. 13. We played ball again today. It rained last night. Three men of
company G were tied up today for running the pickets.

FEB. 14. We were ordered back to Providence this morning. Caught a
sheep and brought it along. The roads are very muddy. We met Gen.
McArthur on the way back. One of our brigade went on the south side
of the lake and the other on the opposite side. They are clearing the
brush from the bayou that leaves the lake for Tensa and are stopping up
others.

FEB. 15. Sunday. We had a big thunderstorm last night. Part of
McClernand’s forces came up on the transports this afternoon. The
supposition is that all are coming up.

FEB. 16. I was on guard (supernumerary), all day and was not called
out. It was rainy this morning.

FEB. 17. Rain all last night and all day today. There has been no work
done on the ditch since we came back, on account of the rain. The river
is falling fast. A large wharf boat went down at noon.

FEB. 18. Cloudy this morning, though not raining. The ground is
covered with water and mud. The old wooden gunboat “Tyler” is lying
here at anchor.

FEB. 19. Tuesday. Warm and pleasant. Mud drying up very fast. Work on
the ditch was continued today by four hundred Nigs. We draw rations
for twelve hundred Negroes, wenches, children and all. The women and
children will be sent into the cotton fields to work. Men are detailed
to oversee them.

FEB. 20. Wednesday. Beautiful day. We played ball.

FEB. 22. Friday. On guard. Stood picket in a large cotton field which
contains five or six hundred acres of cotton, unpicked. I went back to
the cane brake and got a fish pole. The guard of our forage train came
in contact with some cavalry in the vicinity of Old River and routed
them. In the course of the proceedings a Negro teamster hopped off his
horse, drew a revolver and shot a Reb who had just shot one of our
Captains, and took two prisoners.

FEB. 23. We were relieved early. The day was fine. A fleet of ten boats
landed here this morning, having on board Logan’s division. They landed
and marched back about three miles and camped on the bank of the lake.
John A. Logan looks fine. Colonel Stevenson looks the same as ever.
It is rumored that he is trying to get us back into his brigade. A
year ago today George and I explored the caves under the bluff below
the dam, and one year ago tomorrow we left the dam. Played ball this
afternoon. There are about four hundred Negroes at work on the levee.

FEB. 24. Played ball this forenoon and in the afternoon were detailed
to extinguish a fire which destroyed the best part of town. The Post
Office, one of the best buildings, was burned. We had dress parade at 4
o’clock. Gen. Logan’s address to his troops was read to us. Grant and
McPherson were both here today. It is rumored that the “Star of the
West” has been captured.

FEB. 25. Our division was inspected today by Major Strong,
Inspector-General. Ours was the first regiment inspected. We had a
thunder shower in the afternoon and an awful one last night and this
morning. Our tent leaked like a sieve. The river is rising very fast.
The bank is being leveled to keep the water out of the canal. We had
dress parade this evening.

FEB. 28. We mustered and had regiment inspection this afternoon.
Major Peats of Co. K complimented the troops quite highly on their
clean guns. The ground is drying off fast. The river is still rising.
There is much sickness, and about two burials take place every day.
The “Rocket” came up tonight, bringing Gen. McPherson. I heard an
adjutant-general say that the Rebs had sunk the “Indianola.”

MARCH 1. We had company inspection at 12 o’clock and dress parade at
5 o’clock. We then drew clothing, which was needed very much. I drew
three pair of socks and one pair of trousers.

MARCH 2. On picket in the cotton field today until about 3 o’clock,
when Capt. Wheeler, officer of the day, came around and relieved us.
They have the steam tug on the lake bank nearly ready to launch.

MARCH 3. We had a short game of ball this morning, but Buttons got mad
and broke it up. Negroes are coming in very fast. We had dress parade
at 5 o’clock, after which a game of ball. To close the scene Bill Lowe
and Ragan had a fight. The river has risen over two inches a day.

MARCH 4. We had dress parade at 4 o’clock. Orders were read for
regimental drill of one hour each forenoon and afternoon.

MARCH 5. We received the news of the Conscription Act. It passed both
Houses and became a law. It receives the general approval of the
soldiers. Peats drilled us from 10 to 11 o’clock this forenoon, and
from 2 until 3 o’clock in the afternoon. We had dress parade at 4
o’clock. There was an order read from Major Peats awarding a medal,
worth not less than fifty dollars, to the best drilled in the manual,
and the most prompt in the discharge of duty. He gives until the 1st
of May. A dredge passed here today. Some of our boys found four hundred
bales of cotton, a large pile of corn, and about two tons of meat
hidden in cane brake and swamps.

MARCH 6. Friday. The gunboat “Tyler” came up last night and is lying
here this morning. I helped make out muster rolls today.

MARCH 7. We had a heavy rainstorm last night. I finished making out the
muster rolls for January and February.

MARCH 8. Sunday. We had a warm and sultry day which ended in a thunder
and hail storm. We had dress parade at 4 o’clock.

MARCH 9. Helped get out the morning report book in the forenoon. At
noon the company formed and we marched up town and received our pay.
Mine was nineteen dollars. Cold and windy today. At about 2 o’clock
heavy cannonading was heard on the other side of the river in the
direction of Yazoo City. It was continued until after dark, and in the
night it started again and continued for some time.

MARCH 10. Cold, rainy and disagreeable. We paid old Sampson off and let
him go. We still have our house and cook in it, and are living very
well at present. We draw crackers two-fifths of the time, and flour the
remainder. We use cistern water altogether. The spirits of the troops
are higher than they have been in six months. If old Abe would only
call back a portion of the first volunteers they could soon annihilate
the enemy.

MARCH 12. Bright and pleasant. About one hundred and twenty-five Nigs
were set to work this morning to open the old levee and let the water
in. We were ordered out of our house this morning. Had dress parade
at 4 o’clock. The sentences of F, Co. A and W, Co. C, were read. The
charges were attempted desertion. The sentence was the forfeiture of
all pay and allowances, and to be confined in the military prison at
Alton, Ill., with a ball attached to the leg by a chain four feet long,
to serve out the remainder of the time of their enlistment, and at the
end of the three years to have “D” branded on their right hips, their
heads shaved, and to be drummed out of service. Some letters were read
from the parents of the boys, counselling them to desert.

MARCH 13. Clear and pleasant. I made out the quarterly returns. For
some reason they have suspended work on the cut.

MARCH 14. Bright and clear. Drill forenoon and afternoon. Dress parade
in the evening, the same as yesterday. We had a game of baseball in the
evening. I worked all day on the pay rolls.

MARCH 15. Warm and rainy. I arose before roll call and took a walk down
to the levee. Vegetation is starting rapidly. Peach trees are just in
bloom, and some are leaved out. Logan’s division came down and embarked
on transports during the day.

MARCH 16. The long expected opening in the levee was made this evening,
amid the shouts and cheers of the two divisions. The water was let
through in two places, each about two feet wide. The heavy clay banks
melted away rapidly. Along in the night we heard heavy cannonading.

MARCH 17. Hot and sultry. I got up at reveille and went down to see
how the cut prospered, and found the water rushing through, a perfect
torrent. The channel had washed out about one hundred feet and is still
washing. If it does not succeed, it will not be for want of water.
Captain Bush went through in a yawl this morning. It was a dangerous
experiment, but he came out all right. In the course of the day some
of Co. A went through with the same result. Some of the boys disturbed
the bricks in one of the vaults in the cemetery and exposed a cast
iron coffin, hermetically sealed. The lid was moved and the head and
shoulders of a man who had been dead for eighteen years were visible
through the glass. It is a shame the way this cemetery has been used.
The Nigs are at work putting up a temporary levee between camp and the
ditch, as some of the town is being overflowed. The 11th Ill. and 14th
Wis. of our division went up the river a few miles and we hear they
had a fight. Logan’s division started up this morning.

MARCH 18. The cut has washed about one hundred feet since yesterday.
The water in the ditch is rising fast.

MARCH 19. Thursday. Cloudy, looks like rain. Cleaning up and ditching
our camp was the order of the day. I was on the detail to dig a ditch
on each side of the camp. The banks of the ditch are slowly washing
back. It is now about one hundred and fifty feet at the first levee,
and two hundred at the second. Water is slowly rising in both the ditch
and the lake. The President has given deserters until April to report
at a certain depot. Co. K expects about four back.

MARCH 20. Friday. I was up at reveille as usual and went down to the
ditch. To my surprise I saw a big oak just outside the channel washed
up by the roots. The tree was about three feet in diameter. Another
of nearly the same size washed out before noon. I went fishing this
morning. We can see fish weighing from forty to one hundred pounds,
working up against the current. I threw my spear at them, but they
were too far off. I saw a laughable incident this evening in front of
McPherson’s headquarters. Some of the boys were trying to fasten a yawl
to a tree and float down to where the fish were showing themselves in
an eddy. The first time they missed the tree and went whirling into
the center of the channel and came very near upsetting. They finally
brought it to, and after a good deal of hard work, got it into position
for another trial. This time they were successful, caught a projecting
limb and pulled themselves into the eddy formed by rushing around
the tree. After they had made themselves fast by a long rope, they
undertook to get out of the eddy, which proved no easy job, for as soon
as one end was pushed into the current the boat would whirl around and
back up into its former position. While on the whirl it threw off one
man’s hat. McPherson and officers and nearly the whole regiment were
out watching them, and the cheering was loud enough to raise the dead.
It was nearly dark when they got out of their predicament. I worked
nearly all day on the company’s papers.

MARCH 21. The water rose in the canal so that it ran up into our camp
in the night. It washed away the trees that were rooted up yesterday.
The channel is smooth and a good boat could go through it. One year ago
today we left Winchester, Virginia, on our march for Manasses Junction.
Part of Providence was burned this afternoon. The few citizens and
Negroes whom the raise of the water had overtaken, were wading in the
streets, waist deep, trying to save what things they had left.

MARCH 22. We had orders to draw and cook one day’s rations early this
morning. The water rose a good deal last night, and nothing but a
small temporary levee keeps the camp from being inundated, and that is
being washed away. The cattle and mules are all being driven higher up.

MARCH 23. It rained all night. Our tent leaked like a sieve. We still
remain in camp but it has rained nearly all day.

MARCH 24. We had a hard storm last night, with heavy thunder. This
afternoon some miserable fellows set fire to some buildings, among them
a church. Such men should be sent to Alton. The channel is deepening
and widening, and the water is rising. It is now about two feet above
our camp. I expect some dark night to be wading out to our transports,
and that right suddenly. The news came last night that a number of
Farragut’s fleet were at the mouth of the ditch, below Vicksburg,
and that he had taken Warrentown with all its ordinance. Gen. Carr’s
division went down on transports today.

MARCH 27. Yesterday and today Buck and I were at work copying orders
into the company order book. Today they discovered, in Logan’s
division, a girl who had served eighteen months as a private soldier.
They took her to the preacher’s to get her a dress and will send her
north. A good many of our boys saw her.

MARCH 28. Two large gunboats, both iron clads, went up early this
morning. Troops are passing down.

MARCH 29. We had a lively time last night. A storm of rain and wind
began about 10 o’clock in the evening and kept up until about 12,
when the wind increased and the rain ceased. Out tent bent and reeled
like a willow. I got up to dress before she went over, but had just
got my legs into my trousers when down she came full tilt. I finally
extricated myself, seized my knapsack and started for dry ground, got
into the commissary and spread down, when to cap the climax the levee
broke through and the water came rushing in upon us. The drums beat,
the boys fell in, and we had a general move up the levee. Most all of
the tents blew down and some of them were whipped nearly to pieces. In
the meantime Captain Bush had his Negro brigade out, filled them up
with whisky, and ordered them into the water waist deep. By dint of
perseverance and hard work they succeeded in stopping the break. I took
up some boards and passed the remainder of the night beside the cotton
pile. This morning the effects of the storm were everywhere present.
One of the boats was blown up on the beach, the smoke stacks of two
others were blown away, and shanties everywhere were blown down and
torn to pieces. It continued cold and windy all day. Charlie Berry came
back last night. This afternoon Gen. Smith’s (John E.) division came
down and anchored here for the night. In the afternoon some of the boys
of the 14th made a break on the sutler’s stock. It was no more than
done when the 17th and 95th Ill., 1st Kan., and 16th Wis. came rolling
over the levee. Canned fruit, boxes of boots, shoes, oysters, oranges,
lemons, bales of shirts, pants, socks, drawers, barrels of soda
crackers and sugar, boxes of raisins, and in fact everything which the
large stock could contain. He had just got in a new assignment, valued
at somewhere near $10,000. The poor old fellow ran around wringing his
hands and wishing he had stayed in “Chicago.” The guard arrived just as
they had him completely cleaned out. I can say that my hands are clear
of such wholesale robbery. At 9 o’clock roll call the companies had
orders to deliver up the contraband articles in their possession.

MARCH 30. Monday. Cold. The boys have turned over most of the stolen
goods. Gen Smith’s division started on its way down this afternoon.
Gen. Grant is concentrating troops rapidly, the grand issue must be
approaching, and the sooner the better. This afternoon we drew the old
fashioned wedge tents, one for every four men.

MARCH 31. Tuesday. Frank, Newt, Jim Sweeny and I comprise our newly
established household, and we were busy until afternoon raising and
settling our tent, and building our bunks. We went out foraging last
night and made a raise of boards enough to put up our tent, build our
bunks, etc. This afternoon the little tug came out of the lake into the
river. We are having very cold weather for the place and time of the
year. We hear that Gen. McArthur has acquitted the 17th Ill. of the
raid. One year ago tonight the 12th Ind. was camped at Bristo Station,
and I made my unsuccessful search for Uncle Lebbeus.

APRIL 1. Wednesday. Last night was cold and frosty. A boat came in
with a load of deserters. There were quite a number for the 17th, but
none for company K. About the middle of the forenoon a steamer passed
up, towing an iron clad. She must have been disabled at Yazoo or at
Vicksburg.

APRIL 2. At 11 o’clock last night an orderly call sounded and we
received the orders to cook two days’ rations, and be ready at 7
o’clock, to board the transport for a foraging expedition. The morning
was cool and pleasant. At the appointed time we boarded the steamer
“David Tatum” and proceeded slowly up the river. On the way we saw
where the levee had been cut in a number of places, the water was
rushing through rapidly. All the country back was flooded. We stopped
and took a couple of Negroes and a fine yawl. We arrived at our
destination about 4 P. M. It was sixty-five miles above Providence
Lake. The object was to secure a barge of hay which had been wrecked
and partly sunk the night of the storm. There were six companies of
us, and we were divided into reliefs of two companies each, and set to
loading the hay.

APRIL 3. We succeeded in getting the boat loaded by 3 P. M., then we
started down and landed fifteen miles below and killed a lot of hogs
and took a large, beautiful, ten oared boat. It was the nicest thing
of the kind I had ever seen. Frank and Doty took some books and got
themselves into trouble. We backed off and started down about dusk.
Peats had four or five men tied up. We met a fleet of thirteen boats
just after starting. After dark there was a light waved on shore as a
signal to come to, but the Captain thought it might be a decoy so we
steered on down and arrived at our camp about 11 o’clock.

APRIL 4. The paymaster is here and we sign the pay rolls this afternoon
for four months’ pay. Hospital boats are going below and there is every
indication of an approaching engagement.

APRIL 5. Was detailed and worked all afternoon unloading commissaries
from the “Woodsides” to the “City of Madison,” a commissary boat of the
post. A gunboat went down the river this afternoon.

APRIL 6. Monday. Today is a great day for the 17th, as it is the
anniversary of the battle of Shiloh. We moved back to the cotton field
this morning, it being much higher and a better camping ground. It
took most of the day to move, raise our tents and settle.

APRIL 7. Tuesday. A general clearing up of camps which took until this
afternoon. Tom Martin came back yesterday and an order was read at
dress parade returning him to duty.

APRIL 8. Wednesday. At 11 o’clock this forenoon an orderly call was
beaten and we received orders to be ready in fifteen minutes with
all our arms and all our accoutrements on, to march down with other
brigades of the division, to a large plantation house. Upon the porch
stood Generals Thomas, McPherson, McArthur, Crocker, and a drove of the
“rankest commish,” such as Colonels, Lieut. Cols., and Majors. Gen.
Thomas was a fine stately looking man, tall, with iron gray hair, and
apparently about sixty-five years of age. He was introduced by Gen.
McPherson in a pleasant speech. Gen. Thomas then made a few remarks
in which he expressed great sympathy for the poor enslaved Africans,
and announced the President’s settled policy of arming the Negroes. He
authorized two regiments to be raised here. He said he had authority to
commission officers for said regiments, where the applicants came well
recommended. I like the policy. He also said the object of it was to
protect the navigation of the Mississippi and defend other Negroes who
were at work on abandoned plantations trying to raise their living.
After Gen. Thomas was through, Gen. McArthur was called on. He came
forward and gave a short, good natured speech. He was heartily cheered.
After him came Col. Reed of the 15th Iowa, Crocker, and Captain Chink,
who by the way, is to be Colonel of one of the regiments. When they had
concluded we marched back to camp and Gen. Thomas boarded the steamer
“Rocket” and started up to Logan’s division. When we returned six
applications had been handed in for appointments in the regiments of
color--from Co. K, namely: Hines, Davis, Foxears, Foster, Chesher and
Berry.

APRIL 9. Warm and pleasant, in fact we have had beautiful weather for
over two weeks. Major Peats is gone and Capt. Moore is in command of
the regiment. Nearly half the company went fishing this afternoon. Buck
got a pass to take us outside the pickets and we caught about a mess.
We had dress parade at 5:30 P. M. Two boats, the “Edward Walsh” and
the “City of Alton” came down with deserters. There were two for our
company.

APRIL 10. Warm and pleasant. At 10 o’clock we had muster. The whole U.
S. forces are to be mustered today, to find the exact condition of the
army, and the number of conscripts needed to fill the regiments up to
the required standard. We had dress parade this evening in which the
two deserters were returned to their companies by a regimental order.
Our company needs about fifty-four to fill it up.

APRIL 11. Saturday. A beautiful day. On regimental guard. Most of the
company have gone fishing. We have as easy and fine times now as it is
possible for soldiers to have. Foster got the position of Captain in
the new regiment. They had a Negro meeting this afternoon. Chink, and a
colored man named Frederick Douglas, spoke.

APRIL 12. We had a hard rain last night. Our new tents did not stand
the storm much better than the old ones. They disappointed us much.
Captain Wheeler succeeded in getting B---- an appointment in the 9th
La., Chink’s regiment. Some of the boys are quite hurt to think as poor
a soldier as he should have the appointment. They went down below on
the “Platte Valley” and brought up a large number of Negro recruits.

APRIL 13. Rainy and disagreeable. Ross’s division passed below today.
They did not land.

APRIL 14. Cool and cloudy. I was detailed and went down the river
foraging. It was about six miles and the roads were very muddy. About 5
o’clock, Hornby’s division came down direct from Yazoo Pass. The “Lady
of Jackson,” the “Duke of Argyle” and other stern wheelers were nearly
ruined in that expedition. They were the nicest boats on the river
when they left here a month ago. The 48th Ind. was aboard. I hunted up
John Metternich and had a long talk with him.

APRIL 15. Wednesday. Went down and visited with John this morning,
until the fleet backed off and started down.

APRIL 16. Gen. McClernand and staff went below today. More troops
passed down the river. Some of the troops broke into a sutler’s shop
night before last, and there is an investigation going on, so we are
not to get our pay until it is settled. Capt. Moore spoke to the
regiment tonight on dress parade and offered one hundred dollars to the
man furnishing the most evidence of the guilty parties. We have review
of the division tomorrow, and brushes and blacking are in great demand
tonight The Captain buys it with the company fund and furnishes it to
us.

APRIL 17. Our brigade was formed at 8:30 A. M. and we marched down
about three miles, where we found the other brigades drawn up en mass
awaiting us. We were reviewed by McArthur and everything passed off
in style. I think we never did better. We returned to camp about 2
o’clock. Capt. Moore (commanding the regiment) told us he would leave
a paper with the Captains of the different companies, for those not
implicated in the sutler raid to sign. The Negro regiments are filling
up fast. Today I saw one on guard for the first time. There was heavy
cannonading for about four hours last night, and occasionally today. It
is supposed the fleet is trying to run the blockade.

APRIL 18. Saturday. Warm and pleasant. Our brigade is ordered down the
river for review. It was supposed to be done for Gov. Yates, but he did
not arrive, and McArthur took us through, the same as the day before. I
think we did slightly better than we did the other time. A little after
dark we had an awful storm of wind and rain. I got up and dressed,
thought surely the tent was going over, but it was all right.

APRIL 19. Sunday. We got four months’ pay today--no pay was deducted. I
expressed home $55 and Frank sent $45.

APRIL 23. Thursday. On picket at the Negro quarters of the 8th La.
Leavitt volunteered to stand my guard. We got orders this evening to
prepare three days’ rations for a foraging expedition up the river.
Capt. Wheeler went home today.

APRIL 24. Friday. We boarded the “White Cloud” this morning and started
up to Greenville, where we arrived in the afternoon. A regiment had
just boarded transports and started below. We lay there until after
dark, then started and landed toward morning, about seventy-five miles
above Greenville.

APRIL 25. Buck took Fox, Boggs and I outside the pickets and we went
up about two miles to a fine plantation where we got a lot of butter,
a knife, some forks, a chicken, and all the sweet milk we could drink.
We found the overseer’s account book hidden in an old chicken coop
with some other things. At night the chickens, goats, sheep and hogs
came in by wholesale, together with a lot of beeves. The object of our
expedition was to obtain Negroes and supplies.

APRIL 26. Sunday. Twenty-one years old today. How my mind carries me
back to those good old times when I used to welcome this day of all
others, when my sister, aunts, and grandpa composed the family circle.
What a change! That good old man whose memory I revere and cherish, is
gone, and the old place is sold. On picket today. Mosquitoes are very
thick.

APRIL 27. It rained this forenoon. We started back about 1 o’clock and
arrived at Lake Providence. Found orders there awaiting us, to leave
in the morning for Vicksburg. I took a good wash and went to bed.
The river is rising very fast. The Captain commanding the expedition
did not want us to take off our live stock, but the boys threw them
overboard and secured them as they swam ashore.

APRIL 29. Wednesday. Making out muster rolls today. We had dress parade
at 5 o’clock. The “Edward Walsh” came up this morning for the 95th
and us. We are to return to Stevenson’s brigade. Stevenson is now
Brigadier-General. We expect warm work shortly. The river is falling
rapidly. It is a number of feet below where it was in the spring when
we first came down here. I was walking on the bank this evening when
whom should I see but Coon, the little Negro who used to cook for Capt.
Williamson. A new iron clad boat and hospital boat went down the river
yesterday. I wrote two letters today, one to Rosalie, and one to George
Butterfield.

APRIL 30. Thursday. Major Peats returned last evening and at 8 o’clock
this morning, mustered us for pay, after which we boarded the steamer
“Edward Walsh” for Milliken’s Bend. Most of the boys bought what was
called blackberry jam, but it was merely liquor in cans and created
a drunken row in which some were hurt, one officer and two privates.
Arrived at the Bend before dark. The troops have all left, except the
convalescents. They took one tent to each company and loaded the train
with commissaries, hard-tack, pork, coffee, salt and sugar. I took a
towel, one pair of socks, my oilcloth and blanket. This evening we
heard heavy and continued firing up the Yazoo, supposed to be Sherman
attacking Hams Bluffs.

MAY 1. Friday. Up at 4, and started on our march at daylight,
accompanied by the 95th and a big train of commissaries. A fine road
has been made by Bush’s engineering corps. We passed through Richmond,
a small country town. It is a beautiful country and the planters are
wealthy. The plantations range from six hundred to twenty-four hundred
acres. The land is low and level and the soil is rich. The roads have
been very bad, but are better now. We made a hard march of nineteen
miles.

MAY 2. Marched fifteen miles, very tired. We passed McArthur’s division
this forenoon. Weather awfully hot.

MAY 3. Started at 5 o’clock, as usual. The country through which we
are now passing is the most beautiful I have ever seen. The plantation
mansions are grand, and the grounds and outbuildings are fitted up in
fine style. Each plantation has a splendid steam gin, and some have
steam cane-mills as well. The mills must have cost between ten and
twenty, possibly thirty thousand dollars. The inhabitants have but
recently left. They put in their corn crops, and some cotton, before
going. The corn is nearly two feet in height. The boys have destroyed
a number of gins and a good deal of furniture. The roads have mostly
followed the banks of bayous, and alligators, turtles and snakes
abound. The boys have shot a number of alligators. We marched twenty
miles today. I became overheated and completely exhausted.

MAY 4. We started early and after marching eight miles, arrived at the
landing called “Hard Times,” where we took the steamer “Silver Wave.”
We crossed the river and landed four miles below at Grand Gulf. There
is a high promontory and a range of bluffs here which the Rebels had
forfeited with nine guns. It commanded the entrance to the Black River
as well as the Mississippi. It was a fort of nature’s own construction.
We have had a fatiguing march and a good many have given out. Grant’s
headquarters are eighteen miles back. We hear that Logan’s division is
in advance and has done good fighting, also that many prisoners have
been taken. I should like to hear from home very much just now.

MAY 5. Gov. Yates and Adjt. Gen. Thomas are here. We are detailed
to remain here and do fatigue duty. The burning barges loaded with
provisions came down this evening. The town of Grand Gulf is entirely
destroyed. I didn’t know there had been a town there until told.

MAY 6. We hear that McClernand’s troops are advancing. One hundred and
twenty-eight prisoners came in this morning. We are having a very cold
snap for this time of the year.

MAY 7. Thursday. Very cold again today. Had to stand around the fire to
keep warm. Seventy-four more prisoners came in today. A good many of
our boys found old friends or acquaintances among them. They have been
very poorly dressed and fed. There is general activity today, Steele’s
division is crossing over--also Tuttle’s. Gunboats and transports are
engaged in the work.

MAY 8. Friday. All quiet. Sherman’s corps moved out this morning. An
exorbitant price is demanded for everything. A sheet of paper and
envelope are five cents each. Twenty-five cents for a lemon; six
dollars for a canteen of whisky; milk costs a dollar a quart, and other
things in proportion. At 5 o’clock we boarded the “Empire City” for the
lower landing, fifteen miles below, to protect the hospital and bring
off the wounded.

MAY 9. Saturday. We disembarked early this morning and went back in the
country three miles where we found about three hundred of our wounded
in a splendid country mansion. The books show that the house cost over
one hundred thousand dollars. We lay here in the shade during the day
while the ambulances were carrying the wounded down to the river.

MAY 10. Sunday. We were awakened last night at 11 o’clock and ordered
to fall in with all possible speed. We hurried back to the river and
returned to Grand Gulf, which was supposed to be in danger of an
attack. Flats and transports brought down shipping teams which sent
food to the front. Cumbersworth, Hagan and Hunt each got a barrel of
flour last night when they were on extra duty, burying a soldier.

MAY 11. Monday. Made out muster rolls this forenoon. Blair’s division
came down this afternoon.

MAY 12. Tuesday. On brigade guard. Jim Chester and I went outside the
pickets and picked dewberries and mulberries, all we could eat.

MAY 13. Wednesday. I made a raise on commissary last night. Boggs,
Schultz and I ran the pickets and got some mulberries this morning,
and brought back four quarts of which we made pies this afternoon.
McArthur’s division is coming in. Hooker is fighting a great battle in
the East. We cannot get the particulars.

MAY 14. Thursday. We got orders this morning to be ready to move at a
moment’s notice. We hear that Grant has had another battle. The “Gen.
Price” came up this morning from Red River. We were ordered on the
march at 8 o’clock. It rained just enough to lay the dust and make
good marching. We marched ten miles and camped on a small stream. The
country is rough and hilly. The roads follow the ranges of hills, so
there are few to climb. Every patch of ground that is tillable is
tilled and planted to corn.

MAY 15. Friday. Marched twenty miles, saw some fine fields of wheat
that are just turning. We heard the cheering news today that Richmond,
the Rebel capital, is captured, and also that Jackson, Miss., is
taken. The country is the same as yesterday--rough and hilly.

MAY 16. Saturday. We had a hard march of twenty-five miles today. We
passed through Utica and camped at Raymond. We heard cannonading in
the direction of Big Black Bridge. A battle is supposed to be taking
place. The hills have gradually disappeared and the face of the country
is quite smooth. I saw wheat nearly ready for the reaper. The boys are
tired tonight. I keep up fine. We passed a number of hospitals filled
with the wounded and also passed a large number of prisoners.

MAY 17. Sunday. We started for Big Black Bridge early. Nine miles out
we came upon the road leading from Jackson to Vicksburg, and were upon
the battle ground of yesterday. The horrors of war were everywhere
visible. The dead and wounded were scattered around over the ground.
Here we came upon Bill Stafford, who said McPherson’s corps took
seventeen hundred prisoners and thirteen pieces of artillery, but were
badly cut up. They are burying the dead. It is rumored that Pemberton
was killed. In one place the horses of nearly a whole battery were
killed. We marched five miles, joined our old brigade, and camped
on Black River. Our advance has reached the bridge, and taken three
thousand prisoners, and seventeen cannon. McPherson says we have taken
seven thousand prisoners and sixty-eight pieces of light artillery
since crossing the Mississippi. We saw Stevenson and Logan this
afternoon. I saw Quimby when we stopped for dinner. A number of fellows
swam the Black River and captured chickens, pigs, etc. The Rebels have
chosen their own ground and have been badly whipped each time. We draw
_scarcely any rations_. Engineers are bridging the river.

MAY 18. Monday. We lay in camp until 1 o’clock, when the bridge was
completed and orders came to advance. We crossed in the rear of Blair’s
division and marched to within six miles of Vicksburg. The country is
nothing but a succession of hills. Sherman’s corps was in the advance.
The roads were very dusty, but we marched six miles before we bivouaced
for the night, tired, hungry.

MAY 19. Tuesday. Arose early and advanced three miles and formed our
line of battle, our brigade on the left of Smith’s. We held this
line until afternoon. On the right they fought a little, some balls
passing over our heads. About 1 o’clock we moved up and formed a line.
Shells passed over our heads, one man in our regiment was wounded
and three horses killed. By this time our batteries were planted and
the cannonading became general. It lasted until 3 o’clock and then
slackened and we moved to the right about half a mile. McPherson, Logan
and Stevenson are in the thickest of it. We hear that Sherman’s right
rests on the Mississippi, and McClernand’s left, below. If so they
have them completely surrounded. All praise to Gen. Grant. The country
is rough and hilly, and the hills steep and rugged, and run in ranges
parallel around the town. At 1 o’clock we moved still further to the
left and a little forward. Wounded men are being brought in rapidly. We
lay here till morning.

MAY 20. Wednesday. We were astir early and took breakfast. Cannonading
began at daylight. We were ordered back to our brigade and moved up to
the road. Shells were thrown over, so we moved to the right and were
drawn up. Here we were protected by a hill, and awaited orders. We were
soon ordered to the left, and advanced about half a mile or more, and
lay under the brow of a hill which protected us from the enemy’s fire.
Their line of works are but forty rods in advance.

10 o’clock--Batteries on our right have opened and there is a regular
artillery duel going on over our heads. There is an occasional
premature burst, one of which seriously wounded Dare. Doty and Shaw
each got a slight rap. Our line of skirmishes are on the hill above.
I went up and skirmished a while and fired fifty-nine rounds. While
there, word was brought me that Frank was slightly wounded. The ball
hit a pocket, which was full of things, broke a looking glass, the
handle of a toothbrush, and a thick letter from Cousin Sarah. It
merely broke the skin, making a bruise. He had not fired a single
shot. Seven of our regiment were wounded today. We lay here all
night. A singular incident happened during the night. We struck up a
conversation with the Rebels. One of our boys, after talking a long
time, found he was talking with an old friend. Inquiries were made for
mutual acquaintances, and they had a real social time. Finally they
laid down their arms and came together. The line of fire that followed
the shell from our gunboats and mortars sent over that ill-fated town
was a grand sight.

MAY 21. Thursday. At daylight the implements of death and destruction
were opened once more. I saw some splendid work done by our artillery
and there were many little incidents worthy of note. Three shots came
very near hitting me, one went between Doty’s head and mine, which were
about a foot apart. Brisk fighting all day. Bill Stafford came here
and I wrote a few lines home and sent them by him to mail. At dark the
firing ceased and a lively chat was again opened by the contending
parties. It looked singular to see men fighting with deadly aim during
the day, and then spending the night in friendly conversation. I slept
in the same hollow. Gunboats and mortars fired at regular intervals.

MAY 22. Our line of skirmishes opened at daylight as usual. 7
o’clock--Scaling ladders are being brought around. 10 o’clock--Deployed
for the charge. Terrific cannonading going on over our heads. Shells
are prematurely bursting, wounding our own men. Night--The day has
finally passed away. The 81st Ill. and the 7th Mo. made the charge
and were repulsed. Charging was done along the whole of the lines,
but it was not a concerted movement and proved a total failure, owing
probably to the nature of the grounds. Our boys charged up to the works
in splendid style but were not supported. The Confederates raised and
poured deadly volumes among them and swept their ranks with grape. We
left a good many killed and wounded upon the field. Among the officers,
the Colonel of the 81st was killed and Humphries of the 95th. Our
regiment made no charge, but advanced close to the works and acted
as sharpshooters, and when our charging column was repulsed, we were
ordered to retreat. J. R., fool-like, gave the order loud and distinct,
and as we fell back they poured the musketry and grape among us. We
finally returned to the old camp, having lost eighteen, killed and
wounded. The Rebel works extend as far as the eye can see. They are a
succession of forts and rifle pits.

MAY 23. Saturday. Rainy. How I wish I had a clean shirt or time to wash
this! We were up in good time and moved toward the scene of action.
We again acted as skirmishers. No charges were made today. We lost two
men. As soon as it was dark, Sweeny, Chester and myself dug a fort on
the brow of the hill, and also a line of retreat. While we were at work
the Rebels struck up a conversation. They were lively and sociable.
They wanted to meet us half way and have a sensible chat. They appeared
quite confident of holding the place. They made a great many inquiries
after old friends and acquaintances. They are tired of war, generally
and said they wish old Abe and Jeff Davis had to fight it out. They
said they would give anything for a little coffee. The conversation
became too general and our batteries opened and put a quietus on it by
sending over a few quiet reminders.

MAY 24. Sunday. Up early and took our position behind the works. I had
fired but one shot when we were relieved by the 80th Ill., and returned
to camp for a day’s rest. Toward noon Grant issued an order for each
man to wash and clean up. The order was quickly and gladly obeyed.
Captain Wheeler’s company returned today. Bill was here but a short
time when he was wounded. Two of our men were wounded. The rumor is
afloat that Joe Johnston is coming up in our rear. It had the effect
of closing up a lot of miserable stragglers. We have a line of rifle
pits dug within five or six rods of the Rebel works, running parallel,
from which the 20th Ill. is trying to undermine the main fort. The
Rebels are no doubt suspicious of their intentions, for they began to
rain down grenades upon them. About this time a sad accident happened.
One of the thirty-two pound parrots threw a shell among the 20th, which
took off the legs and an arm for one poor fellow, a leg and an arm for
another, killed two, and wounded several others. This double attack
was too much for them and they fell back. This encouraged the Rebels
and they rose and poured a heavy and continued fire upon us, which was
finally silenced by our sharpshooters and artillery. Lavonan’s division
has been sent back to take care of the rear. We are confident of
success. I stood one hour picket tonight.

MAY 25. Monday. A good deal of firing and some cannonading up to 3
o’clock, when a flag of truce came out. I was over the hills after
plums at the time. There was a cessation of firing along the whole
line. Dispatches were sent to Gen. Grant. Logan went down to the Hollow
where he met the Rebel Colonel Montgomery, a major and a number of
other officers. Hostilities were suspended till 8 o’clock and we went
over and buried our dead of the day of the charge. They had lain three
days in the sun and had turned black. Firing had no sooner ceased along
the line than the contending parties mingled like a flock of sheep.
A great many found friends and relatives, and two or three found
brothers. The Rebels were very anxious to exchange for coffee. They
are, taken altogether, the finest looking lot of Confeds I have seen.
We mingled to such an extent that their officers ordered them back, I
think that they were afraid to trust them, for a good many did desert.
When they turned back they bade us good-bye and said it was hard to
open hostilities again. Frank is around. I got a letter from home.

MAY 26. Tuesday. Very little artillery firing this forenoon. I went
down to Cook’s quarters, got some paper for Buck, and wrote home. They
are connecting headquarters with telegraph wires. One man was wounded
this afternoon. One brigade from each division is moving back to the
rear. They moved about 11 o’clock at night, under the command of Gen.
Frank Blair. Heavy details are at work entrenching.

MAY 27. Wednesday. Moved back to the next hollow in the night. This
morning Brophy was wounded. The day was mostly spent in fixing up cane
brake shanties or shades. Toward night, Wood of Co. A was killed.

MAY 28. Thursday. We were ordered sharpshooting this morning. Nothing
extraordinary happened. Dick Stephens was killed this afternoon--shot
through the head. I was on guard last night. They threw three or four
shells over us. Were busy all the fore part of the night issuing
rations, and bringing water from the river. Col. Smith came back today.

MAY 29. Friday. We were relieved and returned to camp early this
morning. Jim Chesher was wounded. The ball passed through our shanty
and over me. Our artillery along the whole line opened this morning and
it was a grand sight. The Rebels dare not reply. They did not show a
piece. We fired one hour this morning and one this evening--giving them
their daily rations, also opened in the night pouring hundreds of shot
and shell among them.

MAY 31. Sunday. Today ends one month of active campaign, which has
so far been successful, and I do not see why it should not end more
brilliantly than it has begun. I hope to Heaven it will. Bill Stafford
brought over the news this morning that Joe Johnston is fortifying
Jackson. Our knaps came in from Young’s Point today all right. The
weather is hot and sultry. Some artillery firing. I went upon the hill
this evening to see the mortars shell the town. The sight is beautiful,
but it is sad to think of those deadly missiles so faithfully doing
their work of destruction. Many a family tie has no doubt been severed.
We hear that a great many women and children have been killed. Surely
the instigators of war ought to suffer.

JUNE 1. Monday. A terrific cannonading was opened and kept up a long
time from our line last night. I think it must have awakened some of
the Rebels from their slumbers. Rumors are afloat this morning that
the Confeds tried to cut their way through but were driven back. We
had inspection of arms this morning, by Reynolds, at 10 o’clock. The
artillery are getting a heavy supply of ammunition ready at their
batteries and are preparing for operations. The weather is hot. We have
a well dug in the quarters, which furnishes good water.

JUNE 2. The mortar boats were unusually active last night, and part
of the town was burned. It made a grand illumination. Towards morning
infantry firing opened, also artillery. We were immediately formed for
action, not knowing what was coming, but we thought it was the Rebs.
It finally died down and we lay ready to fall in at a moment’s notice,
but were not disturbed until morning. We were up before the sun,
preparing to be out sharpshooting. Our artillery opened the middle of
the afternoon and poured a perfect torrent of shot and shell over us. A
good many burst among us. One man was wounded and we thought ourselves
very lucky that no more were hurt. At night our boys tried to strike up
a confab with the enemy, but not a word could be drawn from them. They
were as silent as their works.

JUNE 3. Wednesday. We were relieved early and returned to camp. Quiet
during the day. Siege guns are coming up and heavy details are at work,
entrenching and fortifying. About 8 o’clock, just as I had gone to bed
and gotten to sleep, after a good wash, we were awakened by the boom of
musketry, and ordered to form our line of battle immediately. We did
so. Co. K and one or two others were held in reserve while the others
were at work digging rifle pits. The firing gradually died away as it
did the night before, and we lay down at 2 o’clock in the morning,
dressed and equipped so as to be ready to fall in at a moment’s
warning. It was rumored that the Rebs were making a desperate effort to
cut their way through the net Grant completely enclosed them in, but
the rumor proved false.

JUNE 4. Thursday. All quiet. Heavy details were made to work on
fortifications. One detail was at work digging a magazine which caved
in and killed one man and wounded another from our regiment. I was on
the detail that worked on the big fork of the road. I worked for over
an hour in plain view of the Rebel sharpshooters on the right. They
were not more than one hundred and fifty or two hundred yards distant.
I expected a ball every minute, but for some reason they didn’t fire
until our relief came on and then they sent a volley over. The work
we are constructing here is on an eminence not more than twenty rods
from the main Rebel fort. From here one can see the river, town, and a
large hospital camp, also three lines of works, mostly rifle pits. We
have heard that the fire in town the other night was their commissary
depot and that the citizens set it on fire to end their sufferings,
which were beyond their power of patriotism and fortitude to endure. It
is rumored that they first requested Pemberton to cut out or surrender.
The Rebels called over the line the other night for us to look out as
they had a new General. We asked who it was and they replied: “General
Starvation.” Blair’s expedition is returning from the rear; they went
within sixteen miles of Yazoo City, but old Joe was nowhere to be
found. A division has just come down from above. I wrote home today.

JUNE 5. Friday. All quiet today, I went out with Boggs and picked some
blackberries. At dusk I went up to look at the fort, and after dark got
over to look at the “land gunboat” as it is called. Frank went over to
the Point after some of the Captain’s things.

JUNE 6. Saturday. There was a little skirmish last night on the left.
Drove in the Rebel outposts and captured one prisoner. A number of
deserters came in today. Six siege guns are coming up from the river.
Today is the quietest we have had since we took up our position before
the town.

JUNE 7. Sunday. Up early, regiment formed and went out skirmishing.
The Rebels command a hollow which we were obliged to cross. They poured
in quite a fire, but no one was hurt. The regiment came across all
right.

JUNE 8. Monday. The company formed before daylight and we crossed the
exposed hollow before light, leaving three men at the rifle pits.
Artillery firing tonight. Boggs and I went up to the big fort. It is
progressing finely. We were fired at from there. After dark they had
a regular moonlight skirmish and in the fracas our “land gunboat” was
burned. We succeeded in running it nearly up to the fort.

JUNE 9. Tuesday. Went back about one and one-half miles with Doty and
Boggs, got three quarts of berries, and took a good wash. Very hot and
dusty. We are anxiously looking for rain. Our eighty-four pound siege
gun has arrived.

JUNE 10. Wednesday. We had not more than finished our early breakfast
when the flood gates of heaven, with all its artillery opened. The
rain poured down on our houseless heads in torrents. We covered up
our things with oilcloths as best we could and sat on them to keep
them dry. Some of the boys were located in the ditch, but they were
doomed to a complete rout. The water came sweeping down in torrents,
bearing shanties, rails, and every obstruction before it. The ditch was
no sooner filled than it overran the bottom, sending the occupants
skadaddling to higher ground. It rained all day in showers, not giving
us time to dry our blankets. It has most effectively laid the dust. The
Rebs have taken advantage of the rain and tried to plant a battery, but
our artillery poured in round after round, slightly deranging their
plans. We have our eighty-four pounder mounted. Was detailed for guard
at the ammunition magazine just before night. We had another heavy
shower after dark.

JUNE 11. Thursday. It cleared off in the course of the day but the
ground is muddy. We had another man wounded today, making thirty-nine
in all. Our big gun threw over some shell and did splendid work. Our
division has about forty cane breakers, none from our regiment. They
have to work at fatigue. There is talk of working them into a pioneer
corps. It is reported that Grant has gone up the Yazoo and left
McPherson in command. McPherson is gaining the good will of his corps
rapidly. He is almost universally liked and esteemed. We were relieved
early and returned to camp. I exchanged my minnie for an Enfield.

JUNE 12. Friday. Some artillery along the line. The old gun
occasionally sends over its dirt disturbers. We have had a beautiful
day. The Rebs sent over a few shells, one of which burst over our
regiment, but hurt no one. Doty, Schultz and I went after blackberries
this morning. I got five or six quarts. Troops are coming up the
landing and going up to the Yazoo. Huron’s command went up yesterday.
They had an engagement at Milliken’s Bend. Negro troops were in action
and are reported to have done well. Frank Bishop was killed.

JUNE 14. Sunday. Another fine day. Rebs unusually active, throwing
shell. They have one gun that is causing us considerable trouble. It
is back in the rear and our artillery cannot disturb it. I wrote home
today.

JUNE 15. Monday. We were aroused at 3 o’clock this morning. The company
was formed and went out sharpshooting. The enemy were rather quiet,
but they had a piece of artillery or mortar directly opposite from
which they sent over shell all day. It was out of sight, but we had our
artillery loaded and ready and as soon as we could see the smoke from
their guns the shells were put in from all directions. A number burst
prematurely. They killed Milligan of Co. A, and wounded three others.
Boggs got a slight rap. It hit his gun first and spoiled that, and then
hit him on the arm. As soon as it was dark we struck up a conversation.
Uncle Ben and four of the others went down and met an equal number of
Confeds. They had quite a chat, but could get no satisfaction from it.
They say they have lain in rifle pits nearly a month. The 36th Miss.
is opposite us. They all tell us the Tenn. and Mo. troops are kept in
the rear because they cannot trust them on the outposts. Two or three
deserted and came over to headquarters last night. They showed three
days’ rations, it would have done for one meal, such as it was--a small
strip of thin pork and a chunk of bread baked out of peas. They came to
the conclusion they would rather die cowards than martyrs.

JUNE 16. Tuesday. Up at 5 o’clock and returned to camp. Doty and I
started for blackberries. I picked a gallon. Davis got an order for
flour and sugar. Ragan baked pies. Frank and I got a letter from home.

JUNE 17. Wednesday. Cool and pleasant. Rebs threw over a good many
shell from their guns. We always knew when it was coming for it was
heralded by six or eight shots from our batteries. I helped make out
muster rolls today.

JUNE 18. Thursday. I worked at muster rolls almost all day. About noon
I was agreeably surprised to be accosted by Pat Gallegher and George
Hissung. Pat is Captain, and George is about to be Second Lieutenant.
I was extremely glad to see them. They both look the same as ever and
are bodyguards of Smith, who is on our left. Frank got a pass and went
over to Hovey’s division to find A. B. Knight, but he was wounded at
Champion Mills, caught and paroled by the Rebs and sent north, and I
expect by this time he is at home. He was a good soldier.

JUNE 19. Friday. We were called from our slumbers by bursting shells
and they continued to come at regular intervals all day. They were
shrapnel filled with a handful of small balls, which rained down in a
perfect shower among us, but fortunately no one was hurt. Their guns
are in hollows and used as mortars out of range of ours and we can do
no better than let them shoot. A good many of our boys are burrowing
into the hillside. We received the melancholy news last evening of the
death of Dare. Poor fellow! he was a good soldier and a true patriot.
One shell from the Rebs’ old mortar fell directly into the tent of
Stolbrand (chief of artillery on Logan’s staff) bursting in the ground,
tearing everything to pieces, and scattering dirt on the writing desks
in other tents, but strange to tell, no one was hurt. Stolbrand was out.

JUNE 20. Saturday. Last night deserters came in reporting another
massing of troops, and about 2 o’clock in the morning our brigade
formed and were ordered up to the rifle pits. The pits were filled
without Co. K, and we marched back to camp as reserve, so I lay down
and slept until morning. About 4 o’clock Logan’s old whistling Jack
sent over its eighty-four pound messenger. This was the signal for
the whole line to open. From six to eighty-four pounders now united
in pouring over a perfect shower of shell on doomed secession. This
continued until 10 o’clock, six long hours. When we were through they
opened their old mortar and another gun. The shell from the small
gun burst over our brigade, throwing numberless pieces among us. One
shell struck on the left of the 7th Mo., in the midst of a crowd
standing around a well. They immediately fell down and rolled away.
The shell burst, tore up the ground, and hurt no one. Such accidents
are constantly occurring, but the boys are not always so fortunate. We
partly expected a charge today. Sappers and miners are digging into the
fort; we can see them from above. Gen. McClernand is relieved and O. E.
Ord takes command of his corps.

JUNE 21. Sunday. We were ordered out at 3 o’clock for skirmishing. We
had a six pounder planted between Co. C’s pits and ours. Johnny Moe,
1st Lieut. Co. C, was shot through the leg, and had it taken off. The
Rebs continue to be quite active and use their mortar considerably. One
of their shells struck one of our big guns, beside which one of the
Generals was standing. It glanced down the side opposite him, battering
the carriage, but hurt no one though it exploded. There is a place
between picket post and camp where five or six Red sharpshooters have
a fine range. Mail came in early this morning. I received letters
from Uncle P., Aunt C. and Rosalie. Papers also came in, and with them
the report of another invasion of Pennsylvania. Report said the Rebs
were already at Chambersburg. I got a pass and went over to Smith’s
division to see Hissung and the boys. I found them all well but Bill
H. I had a good time and returned to camp the middle of the afternoon.
Two men were wounded in camp today. We had roll call this evening. Gen.
Johnston has at last crossed the Black with a force variously estimated
at from thirty to seventy thousand. Divisions, brigades, and batteries
are being detached and sent to meet him. It is reported that Grant and
McPherson have gone to the rear in person. If the Rebs wrest Vicksburg
from us now they must pay dear for it.

JUNE 23. Tuesday. Sweeny and I went to work remodelling our shanty this
morning and at 11 o’clock were detailed on fatigue to fix Gen. Logan’s
bomb-proof underground cellar. We finished it about noon. I took a
knife from his culinary department. The regiment was called on for
numerous details of fatigue duty today.

JUNE 24. Wednesday. I was awakened about 10 o’clock last night by
the roars of artillery and musketry. An incessant fire was kept up
for two hours. We learned today that the Rebs made a sortie but were
driven back. They wanted to hinder us advancing our lines but did not
succeed. Day before yesterday I saw some of the cavalry bring in ripe
peaches and green corn.

JUNE 25. Thursday. We hear the forces in our rear have had a slight
engagement. Our forces fell back until they had their position and then
repulsed the Rebs and drove them back in confusion. The cheering and
acceptable rumor of the capture of Port Hudson has reached us. It is
said to be official. The latest news from the east is that the Rebel
raid is rapidly progressing and they are within forty-seven miles of
Harrisburg, the capital of Pennsylvania. Lee and his generals are
surely adopting Napoleon’s tactics. It yet remains to be seen whether
they have the genius to carry out the bold and fearless plans. It is
now 2 o’clock. The artillery is getting busy, and it is rumored that we
shall have work before night. The brigade was formed in rifle pits at
the brow of the hill. Gen. J. Leggett’s brigade was formed in the rear
of the fort. We lay here an hour before the explosion took place. It
was followed by four others that we could see, and a general opening
of artillery along the whole line, and also the mortars and gunboats
and fleet. As soon as it occurred, regiments filed up parallel with the
fort and poured a close and deadly fire into the enemy’s face. Hand
grenades were freely used on both sides. We lost severely and did not
accomplish our object. The fault must have been the engineers’. The
fort was not destroyed, the concussion was not near what we expected
it would be. We lay there all night. The throwing of hand grenades was
kept up. At dusk I went and drew a new gun.

JUNE 26. Friday. We were ordered out on picket early this morning. The
Rebs on our front were very shy. I only caught an occasional glimpse
of them, but fired fifty rounds, mostly at their port holes and works.
A good many shells and pieces came among us, but no one was hurt. Our
boys at the fort had warmer work and finally fell back.

JUNE 27. Saturday. There were a number wounded this morning and
ambulances continually passed through camp. The day is hot and sultry.
At dusk Doty and I went within a few feet of the Rebels’ fort. We have
sunk another shaft and are again undermining their works. We climbed
the observatory and took a good look at Vicksburg, the river, and its
surrounding works.

JUNE 28. Sunday. Hot and sultry. Went after blackberries alone this
morning and picked four quarts. Had a good wash and returned to camp.
Johnston gradually closing up.

JUNE 29. Monday. Hot and sultry, and very dusty. Rebels unusually
quiet. News from the east very meager. Hooker has ordered a seal to
be put on the press, but from what we can hear a terrible battle is
imminent. May the great Ruler of the Universe grant us success.

JUNE 30. Tuesday. Hot and sultry. Our regiment was paid this morning.
I received twenty-three dollars. A stoppage of three dollars for the
premium which Phelps paid me at Memphis was detached. Co. L, 2nd Ill.
Vol. Artillery came in this evening with rifles and James guns, direct
from Memphis. It is the same battery which was sunk in the river this
side of Grand Gulf while crossing over. They had occasion to stop below
Lake Providence and shell a squad of Rebs. Our regiment is not in as
good health as a week ago. This evening we were ordered out for picket.

JULY 1. Wednesday. Regiment out on picket, but I worked at pay rolls.
The brigade was formed and preparations were made to blow up the fort.
I went over the hill and up the hollow to watch for the explosion. I
waited a moment before the shock of the explosion was felt, and it
looked as if the whole inside of the fort was torn out. It threw out
several people, one Negro was thrown a hundred and fifty feet, lighting
on his head and shoulders, scarcely hurting him. He attempted to run
back, but a half dozen leveled muskets brought him back. He and others
were digging on the inside to weaken the blast, which it did to a
considerable extent. No charge was attempted and all resumed the old
quiet again. The regiment returned from picket after dusk.

JULY 2. Thursday. Mail came in late last evening. Got a letter from
Father, Mother and Rosalie. I went after blackberries and picked a
gallon. I had a good wash. Nothing of interest, but a good many shells
which the Rebs threw over.

JULY 3. Friday. There was a brisk skirmish on our left last night. The
Rebs came out of their works and attempted to drive in our picket, but
were driven back with a loss of nearly one hundred men whom they left
on the field. At 10 o’clock a flag of truce came out and the bearer was
escorted to Gen. Grant’s headquarters. As to the object, every one has
his own opinion. I hope to Heaven it is to propose terms of surrender.
Most of the boys think it is to bury the killed of last night. Neut.
Davis and I took advantage of the cessation of hostilities and crossed
the hill to the old fort. We slipped the guard and reached the far end
of the works within a few yards of those of the Rebels, who lined their
parapets as far as the eye could see. We stood face to face with them,
almost near enough to shake hands, yet not a word was spoken on either
side until their officers ordered us down as we were inspecting their
works too closely. Gen. Leggitt ordered us to go outside the guard and
their officers drew off their men. Hostilities were suspended until
2:30, when a few shells came over and burst, banishing for a while our
fond illusions. But at 3 o’clock! Hail Columbia, Happy Land! Vicksburg
is ours! General rejoicing along the line. Gen. Grant and his cavalry
are to go in and capitulation commences. Thus ends one of the most
brilliant campaigns the world has known since the days of Austerlitz.
No one but Napoleon has equalled it. It has resulted in the complete
destruction of the Rebel army at Vicksburg. They have lost without
doubt about forty thousand men. The boys are beginning to think Grant
is a Napoleon. He has completely wiped out his Shiloh affair. Papers
of the 29th in camp show very discouraging news from the East. The
Rebs are throwing heavy columns into Pennsylvania, and are threatening
Pittsburg, Harrisburg and Baltimore. Northern papers give no account of
the army movements. Hooker has been superseded by Gen. Meade of the 5th
Army Corps.

JULY 4. Saturday. The sun rose bright and clear to usher in this most
eventful day to the American people, but a sad accident happened early
in the morning, which served to mar in no slight degree our rejoicing.
A shell which had been lying around the quarters for two weeks with
the cap taken off and most of the powder knocked out, and some of the
time filled with water, was put in a post fire with the intention of
scaring a certain shaky individual, and had been forgotten. Dreggs of
Co. E lit it and watched the post fire burn for a while and then he
picked it up and carried it and threw it over into the quarters. It
no sooner touched the ground than it burst, and as good luck would
have it, only one man was hurt. Brown, of Co. E, a fine fellow and a
good soldier, was hit in the side, it going through and tearing off
part of the lung. He lived but a short time. At 10 o’clock terms were
concluded. The Rebs are to be paroled and the officers are to retain
their side arms and personal property. Between 10 and 11 o’clock the
Rebs marched outside and stacked their arms, after which they returned
to camp. At 2 o’clock the troops on the left began marching in. At 3 we
formed, and after marching a while in the broiling sun and suffocating
dust, our division moved in and up to the courthouse. We passed a large
number of Confeds. They are as good a looking set of Reb. troops as
we have seen. Most of them are glad they have surrendered. Only a few
look sober and sullen. They had holes dug into the side hill to protect
them from our shells. They look as if it were a sorry 4th of July for
them. Their burial grounds in the different hollows testify to the
number they have had killed. The ground back of their camps is badly
torn up by our mortars, the trees are all marked up, and the limbs cut
off by our shot and shell. Minnie balls, whole shells and pieces, and
solid shot cover the ground. They have defended the place bravely and
I say “All honor to them.” We marched around the courthouse, stacked
arms, and lay there about three hours. Citizens had nice little caves
dug into the banks where they took their families and lived during the
siege. The mortars have nearly destroyed the town. Large buildings
were torn to pieces, each by a single shell. Some went straight
through, and some exploded inside and tore them. A few citizens were
killed. Citizens are moving back to their ruined dwellings. They look
down-hearted and sad, I suppose that in their hearts they wish that
the ordinance of secession had never been passed. Two shells struck
the courthouse. One took a pillar from the observatory and just nicked
the roof as it descended. The other passed down the roof, burst, and
killed eighteen. Some of the boys, together with several Confeds,
broke into a store and stole a large quantity of tobacco and some
other things before the guard came around. A number of gaily dressed
Confed officers passed us, among them being Col. Montgomery, chief of
Pemberton’s staff. The Confeds and our boys mingle together like old
friends and have apparently forgotten that but a short time ago they
were engaged in deadly strife. About 6 o’clock we were formed and
marched back and camped inside the works, close behind where their
old mortar had been fired. Also where their big siege gun had been
planted and was afterward dismounted. The ground around the two pieces
is all torn up by our shot and shell. I went up to the right and saw
a beautiful English gun which our boys used to call “Whistling Dick.”
It is a Whitworth and some of the Confeds told us it was the gun they
had at Fort Pemberton, that sunk the Chillicothe. The works are full of
artillery, most of which they never fired. I saw between the Whitworth
and the fort, a distance of three-quarters of a mile, twenty-eight
guns. Just at dark I was detailed to go over to camp and help fetch the
supper. The Rebs have been living on one-fifth rations and are nearly
starved. They mingled with us freely and we have divided our rations
with them. They tell us they hope we may never know want while life
lasts. Some of their regiments actually had mule meat issued to them on
the morning of the 3rd, and it was in market at fifty cents a pound.
We saw a shoulder of it dressed. Details are at work picking up small
arms and accoutrements, of which they had a large number. Each man had
two guns, one new Enfield (drawn since coming here) for long range
and sharpshooting, and the other loaded with cartridges of their own
make and fifteen buckshot, of which each man had forty rounds. If we
had charged we should have lost heavily. We found glass bottles filled
with powder and balls, with fuses in the ends, which were used as hand
grenades. Grant dispatched Sherman’s and part of Ord’s corps to the
rear this evening.

JULY 5. Sunday. Buck and I took a stroll over the works to the fort
that was blown up this morning, returning about noon. While we were
gone the regiment moved camp down to the hollows. We walked around the
works with the Rebs. They told us where their best shots were fired,
also where the most annoying ones came from. They are very friendly and
our boys treat them well. I believe they will hate to fight us again.
They are very anxious to get home. Frank and I went out and got a fly
to put over our cook shed this afternoon. The boys are gathering tents,
flies and cooking utensils from the different camps. Our tents and
dishes came up from the river this afternoon, and the evening was spent
once more in arranging a camp and digging a well.

JULY 6. Monday. I wrote home this morning. At 9 o’clock our regiment
was ordered out on picket. We have a strong picket guard around the
works to keep the Rebs in. Our company was out at the big fort which
was blown up. My post was on the parapet beside it. This fort commands
a view of the works on either side as far as the eye can reach. In
the afternoon Boggs and I went over to our old camp and took a good
wash. Nothing of importance happened until about 5 o’clock, when a
thunderstorm passed over. It was preceded by an awful wind which nearly
blew me off the parapet. Rebs drew rations.

JULY 7. Tuesday. We were relieved about 9 o’clock and returned to camp.
The day was very hot and sultry. The Rebs are very anxiously awaiting
their parole so they can go home. We had news of a skirmish in our
rear; there were about two hundred prisoners brought in. I saw the
Reb today who fired the grape and canister at us when we were behind
the log on the 22nd. He is a fine fellow and gave our boys credit for
making some good shots. He was anxious to know if he had hurt any of
us. He said we had actually dismounted some of their pieces with our
musketry. It weakened the spokes so that they would not stand the
reaction when fired. The pieces are all dented up by Minnie balls. The
top of his gun had been knocked off. He is from Tennessee. He gave
me the name and rank of each of the generals we had captured at this
place. They are: Gen. Pemberton, Tenn.; Maj. Gen. Smith, Va.; Forney,
Ala.; Brigadier Generals Hober, La., Lee, Va., Green, Mo. (killed),
Reynolds, Ga., Taylor, Ky., More, Ky., Wauld, La., Bowen, Mo., Vann,
Tenn., Barton, Ala.

JULY 8. We had quite a rainstorm last night and today it is cool and
pleasant. The Rebs are around trading the company sugar for coffee and
preparing to leave. Just after tattoo, orders came around to be ready
at 4 o’clock tomorrow morning, armed and equipped.

JULY 9. We were up and stacked arms early this morning and awaited
orders but none came. News came into camp this evening of a fight in
Helena. Gen. Price attacked the place with sixteen thousand troops and
came very near taking it, but with the assistance of the old wooden
gunboats the Rebs saved the day and drove him back, taking over a
thousand prisoners. Price left his killed and wounded on the field. The
Negro troops are said to have fought like tigers. The news from the
East is fair. Meade met the enemy at Gettysburg on the 3rd and they are
still fighting. It is reported that he repulsed two of the grand army
corps under Longstreet and Hill. Rosencrans has advanced and occupies
Tallahoma, Bragg’s stronghold.

JULY 10. Friday. We had another rain last night, and the water ran into
our tent. Doty and I ran the blockades this morning and went over to
see our blackberry patch. I stopped at our old camp on the way back and
took a wash. We had our berries baked into pies. Capt. Wheeler bought
a keg of beer this afternoon for the boys to celebrate the victory.
Nearly all of Co. K are drunk. Columbus Patterson started home on his
furlough today.

JULY 11. Saturday. We were aroused from our slumbers at an early hour
this morning, (between 3 and 4 o’clock) with orders to be ready to move
at 5 o’clock. Breakfast was over and we had our canteens filled and
accoutrements on at the required time. The brigade moved up the road to
the main entrance and deployed in line. The Rebs were formed in their
different camps and marched between our lines, were halted, brought
to a front, and ordered to unstring their knapsacks. Our commissioned
officers, except one to a company, were set to work examining paroles
to see if they were genuine, and the baggage to see that it contained
nothing contraband. A number, when they saw this, slipped out from the
ranks and threw away packages of powder. Our company picked out of
the ravine a dozen packages or more. Our company was on guard along
the line. We had a guard to stop Negroes. It was a touching sight to
see some of them part from their masters--they loved them sincerely.
Very few besides the officers had them. A few women passed out. The
officers carried their swords and revolvers slung by their sides. I
saw Gen. Pemberton, Maj. Gen. Bowen, Brig.-Gen. Hebay, of the C. S. A.
pass out. We passed out some four or five thousand on this road. The
weather is hot and sultry. A sick surgeon came out and while they were
examining the regiment he became worse. I brought him some fresh water
and he asked me to call on him, as he was carried back to a small tent
on the hill in plain sight. I did so after we were relieved, and took
his Nig to camp with me and sent him back with warm cakes and tea.
About 3 o’clock I was on a detail which was sent up the road to relieve
a guard who had been out since morning. We had been on post but a few
moments when we were relieved, and I returned to my protegee. He had
been in all the eastern engagements, from the battle of Winchester
to that of Antietam, he having been with Stonewall Jackson. He was
perfectly familiar with all the country around Winchester, Bunker Hill,
Martinsburg, Williamsport, and Harper’s Ferry. He was an assistant
surgeon in Gen. Ewell’s division hospital, and helped amputate Gen.
Ewell’s leg above the knee, at the second battle of Bull Run. He
complimented our eastern troops quite highly, and also Gen. McClellan.
He said he heard Jackson and Lee say that McClellan was the man they
feared most. He was speaking of what a cruel thing this war was and
remarked that most of his friends and relatives were in the North, his
mother was in Warsaw, Ind. There I halted him, as a matter of course,
and let him know our Indiana company was raised in that identical
place. He made a good many anxious inquiries, but I was not enough
acquainted in that city to give him any satisfactory information. He
afterwards spoke of Havana, Ill., and said he had practiced medicine
in that town. He was greatly surprised when I told him our company was
from Havana, Mason County, Ill., and he was acquainted with a good
many of the boys as I named them over. I bolted off for the company
and sent up Boggs, who was much surprised to hear that his father’s
old partner was a prisoner in our hands. Papers of the 7th came in
this evening, bringing enthusiastic accounts of a great battle and
victory of Gen. Meade’s army over the Rebs under their gallant General
at Gettysburg. Gen. Meade’s dispatches proclaim a great victory and
the utter rout of the Rebs, with heavy losses of prisoners and colors.
A boat came up from Port Hudson this evening, bringing news of the
surrender of the place and garrison. Hurrah for Banks!

JULY 12. Sunday. After dinner, roll call. I mounted a mule which
the boys had caught and saddled, and started for town. The place is
very quiet. At the wharf you can see transports as far as the eye
can reach in either direction. The river is quite low. I came around
the Rebel works and in coming back was surprised to see so little
artillery commanding the river. Only four guns and one mortar, and a
one hundred and twenty-eight pounder, manufactured in Richmond, Va. In
the land defenses from the river to the English Whitworth gun there
are twenty-six pieces, making in all from Fort Hill around to town
fifty-nine guns. Most of the troops have gone to the rear and there is
less than an army corps here at the present.

JULY 13. Monday. Our forces in the rear are gradually closing up and
skirmishing near Jackson.

JULY 14. Tuesday. The paymaster is here, working on the pay rolls and
quarterly returns.

JULY 15. Wednesday. A heavy detail from our regiment was dispatched to
work on Fort Hill today. They are gradually changing the looks of that
once important fort, from a rude, unshapely mass of dirt to large neat
and substantial works. This afternoon our boys, in filling up the hole
made by the blast, dug out a number of bodies. They had been crowded
into the hole and covered up. Heavy details are at work repairing the
old line of Reb works, also in filling up and destroying our old ones.
The famous covered way from the White House to Fort Hill is nearly
destroyed. It seems too bad to destroy the works that we spent weeks of
hard labor and exposure to construct. It seems to us that they should
stand as monuments for future generations to look upon, but still we
have implicit confidence in the good judgment of Gen. Grant.

JULY 16. Thursday. I am on duty again today. The duty is very heavy
now as all the troops excepting two divisions have gone to the war. I
helped unload ammunition today without any relief and was tired out
when night came. They are running a large supply of ammunition back to
the rear as rapidly as possible.

JULY 17. Friday. Early this morning we moved our camp over about one
mile nearer town. We tore down some houses to get boards for our table
and to fire up our mess quarters. About 1 or 2 o’clock we were paid
again. I received forty-five dollars and fifty-five cents. Frank and I
expressed home fifty dollars each. Stafford was around and gave me a
Secesh song written in the ditches.

JULY 18. Saturday. On duty at Fort Hill carrying gabion baskets. Our
old covered way is nearly destroyed. I got some peaches and apples
today and we had some pies. I also had an ear of corn, but it was too
hard to be good. Couriers came in today with the news that Joe Johnston
had cut through our lines and was retreating. We get no late news from
the East, and are on the tiptoe of anxiety. I wish Grant was on the
Virginia side of that river for a short campaign. Papers on the 11th
are here but no news only that Meade is concentrating.

JULY 19. Sunday. Hot and sultry. Had inspection at 10 o’clock. The
order has come for granting furloughs, two go from our company--G. Ross
and A. J. Van Auken. Got a Free Press but no letters from home. Dress
parade this evening. A funny incident took place. One of the poor,
half-starved horses that overrun the camp, preceded the band as it led
the regiment, just in good kicking distance. We got the New Orleans
Sun the evening of the 15th. It has the particulars of the surrender
and occupation of Port Hudson with five or six thousand prisoners.

JULY 20. Monday. Very hot and sultry. On fatigue, digging a well for
headquarters. Got a number of papers which I culled from a cartload
of them. Two months ago today the siege of Vicksburg began and was
continued through forty-seven long, dreary days, and ended that
glorious old day, the 4th of July.

JULY 21. Tuesday. Boats came in last night and brought Northern papers
of the 14th. No particular news from the East, only Meade concentrating
at Hayes. John Morgan is making a raid into Indiana. I hope he will
succeed in arousing the people and then get himself captured. No news
today from the rear. Jim Chesher came in this morning.

JULY 22. Wednesday. The furloughs have come this evening, approved. I
send this north to be mailed by D. D. Ross. Our regiment registered two
hundred and ninety men at the beginning of the siege. The day of the
charge and other days while skirmishing and sharpshooting, our loss,
killed and dead from wounds, was fourteen, forty wounded, making an
aggregate of fifty-four, over seventeen per cent.

The order of the different divisions of Grant’s army besieging
Vicksburg from the right to the left, June 28, 1863.

Under the command of Gen. Ord--Herron’s, Lammaris’, Hovey’s, Osterhaus’
(gone to the rear) Carris’, A. J. Smith’s.

Gen. McPherson’s Corps--J. E. Smith’s, Logan’s, one brigade of
McArthur’s.

Gen. W. T. Sherman’s Corps--Blair’s, Tuttle’s, Steele’s.

Rear--Herron, Lammaris, Hovey, Osterhaus, Covy, A. J. Smith, J. E.
Smith, Logan, McArthur, Blair, Tuttle and Steele.

JULY 7. The Generals captured are: Lieut.-Gen. Pemberton, Maj.-Gen.
Stevenson, Tenn.; Smith, Va.; Forney, Ala., and Bowen, Mo. Brig.-Gen.
Hebert, La.; Lee, Va.; Green, Mo.; (killed inside works), Reynolds,
Ga.; Taylor, Ky.; More, Ky.; Wauld, La.; Vann, Tenn.; Barton, Ala.

Different army corps and commanders:

   1st--Maj.-Gen. Reynolds.
   3rd--Maj.-Gen. D. Sickles.
   5th--Maj.-Gen. Meade.
   6th--Maj.-Gen. Sedgwick.
   9th--Maj.-Gen. Burnside.
  11th--Maj.-Gen. Howard (formerly Siegel).
  12th--Gen. Stoneman (cavalry).
  13th--Maj.-Gen. O. E. Ord.
  14th--Maj.-Gen. G. H. Thomas.
  15th--Maj.-Gen. Sherman.
  16th--Maj.-Gen. Hurlburt.
  17th--Maj.-Gen. McPherson.
  20th--Maj.-Gen. McDowell McCook.
  21st--Maj.-Gen. Thos. Crittenden.

[Illustration]




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

  Archaic or variant spelling has been retained.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SIEGE OF VICKSBURG ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
